2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R030 School Name: P.S. 030 WESTERLEIGH Principal: ALAN IHNE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 30 353100010030 PK-5 200 Wardwell Avenue 718-442-0462 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 31R030 718-442-4265 Fax: Alan Ihne aihne@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Alan Ihne Tricia Walsh Lori Nappi Lori Ortega (Designee of Chapter Chair) N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: Anthony Lodico Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Building A Staten Island NY 10301 ALodico@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 420-5657 Phone Number: (718) 420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: 31 Kevin Moran Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace, Building A Staten Island NY 10301 Executive Director’s Office Address: KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 420-5657 Phone Number: (718) 391 - 6109 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Alan Ihne Lori Ortega (designee of Chapter Chair) Lori Nappi N/A N/A N/A N/a N/A Dana Agandouch Lori Morenzi Theresa O'Connell *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Theresa Bruno Catherine Anderson Stefanie Tozzi Jo Ellen Fusco N/A N/A N/A N/A N/a Parent Secretary Teacher Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview PS 30 is a community school in the neighborhood of Westerleigh in Staten Island. We serve grades PK-5. Our mission statement is “The mission of PS 30 is to provide each student with a rich education in a supportive environment. We are committed to providing our students with the skills they need to be successful in life, to help them become good 2018-19 CEP 9  citizens and to ensure that they are college and career ready. Parents and caregivers are valued partners in providing our students with the academic and life skills necessary to become valuable members of the community.” 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school has developed numerous partnerships with our community. We partner with St. John’s University which provides graduate education students to assist the school in providing AIS services, as well as, student teachers. We also partner with students from Wagner high school to provide student servicers in conjunction with classroom teachers. We partner with Grow NYC to provide sustainability strategies to students, staff, and parents. Out of this partnership we grew a “Trash to Treasure” team to recycle water bottles, Little Bites, and Capri sun. This program helps to fund our Green Team. We partnered with Learning Leaders to provide certified parent volunteers for our library, lunchroom, classrooms, and to give book talks to students. Now that Learning Leaders is no longer functioning we have brought the program in house. We also partner with The New York Center for Interpersonal Development to provide latchkey and afterschool programs. Within this partnership we also work with City Harvest to provide healthy snacks to our latchkey students. In addition to these partnerships we have a jazz band, 4 th and 5 th grade orchestra, a rock band, a girls Stem Club, boys STEM Club, and an art club. We provide monthly parent networking meetings and developed a hospitality squad to help new parents navigate the school. Our physical education department partners with NY Roadrunners as part of the Mighty Milers program and our track team and the boks (Boks is a before school physical fitness program offered through the CHAMPS program) program. Our Learning environment survey showed the following results: Rigorous instruction- 3.72 Collaborative teachers- 3.92 Effective School Leadership- 4.19 Strong Family Community Ties- 4.15 Trust- 3.99 In all of these categories we have outpaced the city and we have outpaced the district in all categories, but collaborative teachers. In this category we were on par with the district. We will continue to strive for improvement in all of these categories. Only 50% (308) parents responded to the survey this year. We will focus on getting more parents to respond to the survey this year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  OUr school has 10 ICT classrooms and 4 self contained special education classrooms. Student needs range from speech and language development, sensory issues, and students in crisis. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has been focused on building trust within the community and we have accomplished that goal. This is evidenced by our school quality report in which we are meeting our target. We will continue to work on this area to ensure that we reach exceeding target. Our main focus is improving student achievement in the classroom and on state exams, as well as, creating assessment capable learners. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R030 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 822 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 38 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 6 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 36.0% % Attendance Rate 31.0% % Reduced Lunch 7.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 24.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 60.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.61 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 65.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 134 133 94.0% 4.4% 23.1% 2.4% 8.4% 3.9% 4 0% 5.1 64.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  After analyzing state exam data from 2017-2018, we have determined that 18% of our grade 3 and 4 students scored a level 1 on the ELA exam. As a result we have made progress for our Level one grade 3, 4 and 5 students in a priority goal for the school year. In addition, 20% of our grade 3 and 4 students scored a level 1 on the Math exam. As a result we will continue to make progress for our grade 3, 4, and 5 students in Math a priority goal this year  As per our QR we will continue to modify curriculum maps to align our curriculum to the NYS Standards .  As per our PPO Feedback we will continue improving formative assessment and peer and self-assessment in the classroom with the use of rubrics to help drive instruction.  One of our strengths is that we have a dedicated reading and phonics program in grades K-5 (Core Knowledge andWe use , Go Math! at our school)  This year we will be implementing the program Reading Rescue as a tier three intervention. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019 out of 20 general and special education students who scored a level 1 on the New York State ELA Exam in grades 3 and 4, 10 (50%) will increase one performance level on the New York State ELA Exam and out of 25 students general and special education students who scored a level 1 on the New York State Math Exam in grades 3 and 4, 12 (50%) will increase one level on the New York State Math Exam. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  • Align Curriculum maps to the CCLS using Google Docs Teachers • Implement curriculum aligned assessment practices across grades through professional development and working with teacher teams ● We will address high need student groups through professional development utilizing the book Assignments Matter by Eleanor Dougherty Teachers ● Continue to utilize formative assessment daily ● We have implemented a robust ELA program through grades PK-5 • Professional Development on the use of rubrics * 2019 February progress monitoring- We are instituting AIS groups for students still performing far below on Ed performance (27 students in grades 3-5) * 2019 February progress monitoring- We are instituting a 3 dfay a week morning remidation program for students who received a one on the NYS ELA/Math exam Teachers Teachers Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 1-2X a week beginning in October 2018 2018-19 CEP 14  • We have an Echalk website at ps30.org to keep parents apprised Staff, Parents Students of what is happening in the school • PTA meetings include guest speakers who are experts in special education, including autism • Student of the month is given students and parents are invited to our award ceremony • Global Connect goes out to all parents to keep them informed of activities in the building. • Library volunteers • Parent volunteers will do book talks and help teachers in classrooms • Parent Coordinator will hold Parent workshops on topics relevant to parents • The school has created and distributed a parent handbook • Regularly scheduled parent networking meetings • Administration has an open door policy for all members of the school community which builds trust. Staff, Parents Students 3 mornings a week beginning in March 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthlystarting September 2018- June 2019 2018-19 CEP 15  Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families through Tuesday parent engagement time, Parent networking meetings, PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● We will utilize staff and field office support on Monday afternoons to provide professional development ● We will bring parents into the building by holding monthly parent networking meetings. ● We will utilize staff and administration to create and update curriculum maps. ● We will utilize teacher volunteers for our morning program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. . Progress will be mnitored on a monthly basis from September 2018-June 2019 ·Mid Point Benchmark- February 2019 Data analysis of Ed performance and writing. 25 % of students who received a far below level on Ed performance will increase one level to approaching standards. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Performance Series Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2017-2018 school year we had 42 level 3 infractions as indicated by the OORS management system. Our students are provided with guidance services through our guidance counselor and social worker both mandated and at risk. · We work with parents to develop strategies for students when they are having a difficult time at school academically or socially. · Administration has an “Open Door” Policy for all staff, students, and parents. · We have a peer mediation program to assist students having conflict. · We utilize our teams to assist in behavior management.  All of our paraprofessionals and administration are trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Services (TCIS) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ● By June 2019 OORS reports for level 3 infractions will decrease by 50% (21) from last year creating a safe and supportive environment for students and parents where they are challenged both academically and socially by their teachers and peers. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Peer Mediation ● Guidance Services (at risk and Mandated) Students, Teachers, and Parents. ● Student clubs (green team, stem club, student council ● School website that provides real time information ● Latchkey afterschool programs ● Assemblies on bullying and respect ● Professional development ● Parent volunteers to work with students Administration, Guidance, Teachers, Parents Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018-19 CEP 18  ● ELL afterschool programs ● We have an Echalk website at ps30.org to keep parents apprised of what is happening in the school ● PTA meetings include guest speakers who are experts in special education, including autism ELL and special needs students ● ● Parent Coordinator will hold Parent workshops on the topics relevant to parents Teachers, Parents, Students ● The school has created and distributed a parent handbook ● Regularly scheduled parent networking meetings ● Administration has an open door policy for all members of the school community that helps to build trust ● Student of the month is given students and parents are invited to our award ceremony ● Global Connect goes out to all parents to keep them informed of activities in the building. ● Library volunteers ● Parent volunteers will do book talks and help teachers in classrooms ● Administration, Teachers, Afterschool staff Teachers, administration, support staff 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018-19 CEP 19  2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families through Tuesday parent engagement time, Parent networking meetings, PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Guidance resources such as: assemblies and professional development ● Schedule adjustments for peer mediation TCIS ● Human Capital ● Funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 20  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ●By February 2019 we will have 10 less level 3 OORS reports than February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Management System Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  During the 2017-2018 school year, the number of level 3 students went up 5% in ELA and the number of level 3 students went down 1% in math. The number of level 4 students went up 1% in ELA and level 4 students went up 2% in math. This was an improvement over the prior school year. However, in order to continue to raise scores we need to assess for learning on a regular basis · Teachers have one common a week to meet and look at student work using the cycle of inquiry. · Teachers facilitate professional development weekly where they can share best practices and build trust. Teachers attend professional development with the field support office throughout the year component 3c of the Danielson framework is an area that we have noticed needs to improve through both formal and informal observations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, 5% Percent of teachers will move one HEIDI score on component 3C of the Danielson Framework 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  ● Teachers will study the book Assignments Matter by Eleanor Dougherty in Collaborative Teacher Teams to improve student achievement. Teachers Two common prep periods a week for teachers to meet. ● ● We participate in a group with our District 31 Learning partners to share best practices Teachers ● We have received a Sports and Arts grant to address the needs of struggling students ● We have implemented a robust ELA program through grades PK-5 We have applied to be a learning partners school this year Teachers and Administration Teachers and Administration Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 2018-19 CEP 23  ● We have an Echalk website at ps30.org to keep parents apprised of what is happening in the school ● PTA meetings include guest speakers who are experts in special education, including autism Teachers, Administration, and Parents ● Parent Coordinator will train parents on how to use the My Schools Account ● Parent Coordinator will hold Parent workshops on topics relevant to parents ● The school has created and distributed a parent handbook. ● Student of the month is given students and parents are invited to our award ceremony ● Global Connect goes out to all parents to keep them informed of activities in the building. ● Regularly scheduled parent networking meetings ● Library volunteers ● Learning leaders will do book talks and help teachers in classrooms Teachers, Support Staff, and Administration Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018-19 CEP 24 ● Parent Coordinator will hold Parent workshops on the CCLS Staff, Parents, and Students ● The school has created and distributed a parent handbook ● Regularly scheduled parent networking meetings ● Administration has an open door policy for all members of the school community which helps build trust . Teachers and Administration 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Dailystarting September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families through Tuesday parent engagement time, Parent networking meetings, PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Coverages for teachers when they attend professional development ● Funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 25  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By January 2019 there will be a 2% increase in the number of teachers rated effective on component 3C of the Danielson Framework Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance online System, Google Docs Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  15 of our grade 3 and 4 SWD students scored a level 1 as indicated by the NYS ELA exam.  Our teachers need to continue to provide support to SWD students in high level questioning as per PPO feedback.  As per PPO feedback we need to continue to support our teachers in the use of formative assessment and teaching students the proper way to peer and self assess. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 7 (50%) of our grade 3, 4 and 5 SWD students will increase one level on the NYS ELA exam as evidenced by an increase in test scores. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Parent networking meetings Parents ● Hospitality squad ● Parent volunteers  Graduate student volunteers will assist teachers in the classroom by working with small groups Students and teachers  Teachers have been programmed for AIS periods to work with small groups of students. Reflex math and MOBY Max programs to help students reach their goals in both math and ELA. Administration, Parent coordinator, and Guidance Counselor Administration and teachers Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting 2018-19 CEP 28  Administration will provide targeted strategies and teachers through feedback from observations and learning rounds to increase acheivement of SWD students  Teachers will receive professional development either through the school or the borough support feild office in order to increase the acheivement of SWD students. Administration September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families through Tuesday parent engagement time, Parent networking meetings, PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Flexible scheduling ● Human Capital Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019- Data analysis of Ed performance and writing. 25 % of students who received a far below level on Ed performance will increase one level to approaching standards. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Performance Series Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.   We have a strong family and community ties at PS 30.Many of our parents are volunteers daily, we provide monthly parent meetings, and our students give back to the community through various means such as food drives, clothing drives, and family movie nights.  We have a hospitality team made up of parents, we provide parent networking meeting once a month, we have learning leaders in the building working with both staff and students, and we have a strong Parent Teacher Association. Some of our ELL parents do not attend activities and events provided at the school. We will be trying to increase the number of ELL parents that attend activities. On Our 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report we received a score of 4.15 in family and community Ties. This is an improvement over the prior year, but there is still room for improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 Parent attendance at school events will increase by 5% 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● We have an Echalk website at ps30.org to keep parents apprised of what is happening in the school Parents and Students ● PTA meetings include guest speakers who are experts in special education, including autism ● Parent Coordinator will hold monthly parent networking meetings. ● Parent Coordinator will hold Parent workshops on topics relevant to our parents ● The school has created and distributed a parent handbook. Administration, Teachers, Support Staff Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 ● Student of the month is given students and parents are invited to our award ceremony Parents and Students Monthly starting September Administration, Teachers, Support Staff 2018-19 CEP 32  ● Global Connect goes out to all parents to keep them informed of activities in the building. ● Regularly scheduled parent networking meetings ● Library volunteers ● Learning leaders will do book talks and help teachers in classrooms  ELL Parent meetings throughout the year.  Hospitality squad to assist parents new to the school and the country. 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 Daily starting September 2018- June 2019 Monthly starting September 2018- June 2019 Weekly starting September 2018- June 2019 2018-19 CEP 33  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Flexible scheduling ● Funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 Attendance sheets from events will show an increase of 2% parent attendance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Survey and Attendance from events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in grades four and five are first determined to be eligible for AIS based on their State exam results. Students in grades 3-5 are next identified by the results of the Fall Ed Performance assessment of Reading. Students in grades K thru 2 are identified as at risk by CKLA assessments and teacher observations of class assignments.. Students in grades four and five are first determined to be eligible for AIS based on their State exam results. Students in grades 3-5 are next identified by the results of the Fall Ed Performance assessment of Mathematics. Teachers of all grades K-5 use results of Pearson Success unit assessments, checklists and Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reading Rescue, Wilson, RAZ-Kids, Orton Gillingham, SRA, Read Theory and guided reading groups help to reinforce decoding, comprehension, writing and speaking skills. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Teachers work with small groups of two to five students with similar needs. Parent volunteers and Paraprofessionals work with students 1:1. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Academic Intervention Services for ELA are provided during and after the school day and on scheduled Saturday mornings (depending on funding). Teachers and students teachers work with small groups and Parent volunteers work 1:1 with students. Academic Intervention Services for Math are provided during and after the school day and on scheduled Saturday mornings (depending on funding). Pearson Success interactive videos and hands-on activities, SRA Math and Versa-tiles are used to improve number sense, concept development, analysis and organization of word problems and reasonability of solutions. Reflex Math is used as a supplement to improve basic addition, 2018-19 CEP 35  Science Social Studies observations of class assignments to identify students requiring at risk services. Students who did not pass the New York State Grade 4 Science Assessment and those struggling to acquire new skills and information, as determined by teacher observations and class assignments, are identified as students requiring at risk support.. Students struggling to acquire new skills and information as determined by teacher observations and class assignments are identified as students requiring at risk support. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Teachers and parents request intervention for those students who subtraction, multiplication and division facts. Science A-Z, Discovery Science, and Moby Max are used as supplements to increase content vocabulary and comprehension of the science curriculum. A Green Team and S.T.E.M. team have been implemented to support the science curriculum providing enrichment for some students and support for those at-risk with students helping students. Teachers enrich our Social Studies curriculum to increase student achievement for those at-risk of not meeting the standards by focusing on building vocabulary, writing and comprehension within the content area using Social Studies Weekly, and Discovery Education, tobuild prior knowledge, improve students’ understanding of timelines, precursors to and effects of historical events. Services include peer mediation, crisis intervention, parent conferences and Classroom, science teachers and peers work with at-risk students, as needed, during and before school. A science lab, where students work in small groups, has been set up to improve literacy, content vocabulary and comprehension of the science curriculum. Students work in small groups and independently. Teachers work with students in small groups and students work independently or in pairs/triads with online resources. Classroom, Social Studies teachers and peers work with at-risk students, as needed, during the school day. Counseling/intervention sessions can be PS 30’s guidance counselor, social worker and school psychologist work 2018-19 CEP 36  School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) are struggling with school-related anxiety, feelings of isolation, peer conflicts and/or difficulty with social skills. referrals for other services within the school or outside the school community. conducted in a small group or 1:1 stetting. with students throughout the school day, and with parents prior to and during the school day, as neeeded. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  We will provide our students in temporary housing with supplies such as, bookbags, books, and other school supplies as necessary. We will also provide our students in temporary housing with guidance services and resources in the community to assist them. We will also provide our students in temporary housing with AIS services to raise student achievement where necessary. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We will be providing our students in temporary housing with guidance services and supplies as necessary. We received $14,279 in Title I STH for non-Title I schools. 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 41  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 30, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 30 will support parents and families of Title I students by: 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 30, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 45  s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: PS 30 will provide 3rd and 4th grade ELL students with an ENL after school program, titled "Hands-On Minds-On". This program is designed to supplement instruction for English Language Learners (ELLs). The program will enhance students’ English proficiency and literacy development from hands-on activities that will incorporate reading and writing using science content. Based on our data taken from NYSESLAT scores, our ELLs had the smallest gain in reading and writing on the NYESLAT. Through context varied instruction, every student will learn vocabulary, concepts and themes that warrant extended discussion, as well as creative and reflective writing. Our ELL students will be prepared to explore and reflect their experiences on their own and move them toward grade level proficiency. Currently the school has a total of 24 ELLs in third and fourth grade. The chart below shows all English proficiency levels by grade. GRADE ENTERING EMERGING TRANSITIONING EXPANDING TOTALS 3 1 4 6 5 16 4 0 1 0 7 8 Total 24 The Title III Afterschool program will target 3rd and 4th grade ELLS who fall under entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding, which includes newcomers (0- 3 years). This program will provide the students with instruction for approximately nineteen Thursdays from 2:30 to 5:30pm, starting November 29th to May 2nd, 2019. Two Certified ENL teachers will be hired for approximately 75 hours in total at per session rate. PS 30 will not be offering an internal after school program this year. Therefore, a supervisor will be hired and designated to oversee the program. All instruction will enforce use of instructional materials in the home language. Entering students will be paired with another ELL student who has the same home language and a higher English proficiency level. The ENL teachers will co-plan lessons for this program. They will meet once a month on a Wednesday from 2:20- 3:20pm, to plan the curriculum for each month (October to May), with the exception of October where the teachers will meet twice. The afterschool group will consist of 3rd and 4th graders with English proficiency levels of entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding. Based off teacher recommendations, we are hoping to align our afterschool program with the current grade curriculum. There will be one teacher who will be in one classroom for this Title III program with the exception of once a month where two ENL teachers will work together to assist the students with a creative writing project. Student attendance will be recorded and placed in the title III binder along with program notifications in preferred languages. Materials: 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Instructional and classroom materials will be purchased exclusively for the Title III program. These items, such as notebooks, papers, pencils, and material for all activities, will not be utilized during daily instruction as they are supplementary support materials. For the Title III program we will be purchasing an online program called Raz-kids Vocabulary, Writing Reading A-Z. Raz kids is an online program which consists of leveled readers, and provides a library of differentiated books with twenty nine different levels used to practice reading at school, and at home. All vocabulary lessons are based on vocabulary strategies supported by research in accordance with the No Child Left behind Act, (NCLB) criteria. Writing lessons are taught through customized worksheets and activities accompanied by an assessment. Students are strongly encouraged to practice at home. ENL teachers monitor student log in on a weekly basis to ensure engagement, and track individual progress. These hands-on activities will improve students’ English proficiency and literacy development by creating an interactive and fun environment. We will also use the funding from the title III to bring in house trips from the Staten Island Children’s Museum, for our title III program. These in house trips will be science based and aligned with the current grade curriculum. They will include hands on experiments to get students actively involved. Students will focus on a different theme monthly, varying from Plant Life Cycles to Properties of Water. The Staten Island Children’s Museum offer a host of STEM workshops. These workshops include two museum educators, materials and supplies. They use hands-on, inquiry-based approach to teaching and learning. The ENL teachers will work closely with the Staten Island Children’s Museums Educational Manager to ensure all activities are aligned with the current year curriculum. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: PS 30 will offer Title III Professional Development trainings at the school. They will be offered to the ENL teachers, as well as our general education teachers who have English Language Learners in their classes. Teachers will meet once a month on Mondays from 2:30pm to 3:45pm to engage in a book study. This will start in November 2018, and will run until June, 2019. The books that will be utilized and bought with Title III funding are titled “Building Cultural Competence: Innovative Activities and Models" by Kate Berardo and "The Diversity Training Activity Book: 50 Activities for Promoting Communication and Understanding at Work" by Jonamay Lambert. PS 30's ELL population is growing and with all the new mandates we want to improve our ENL integrated instruction to help support our ELLs. Each month we will focus on a different strategy. We will discuss the information, strategies, and tools given by the facilitator as to how we can utilize and implement them in our own classrooms. These professional development sessions will positively impact the progress of our ELLs, by giving our teachers the support they need to give effective instruction. The ENL teachers will plan and give these professional developments while working closely with administration. The only cost for this professional development will be for the book used during this book study. Administration will record and maintain all records in the Title III binder by keeping attendance sheets and agendas. In addition, PS 30 will take advantage of ENL workshops offered by our BFSC (Borough Field Support Center), DELLS and (New York State Language Bilingual Regional Educational 2018-19 CEP 51  Part C: Professional Development Recourse Network) RBERN. RBERN will be in constant contact with the ENL teachers to assist with ongoing training for the staff. RBERN will come into PS 30 on Election Day, November 6th, 2018, to lead a 2 hour discussion on “Cultural Awareness”. All Staff will attend this PD. In addition to this PD, we will rotate our Monday PDs to include all of our general education teachers, and have small group PDs for teachers that have ELLs. In the small group sessions, it will give the teachers the opportunity to work on continuity, methodologies, and strategies. ENL teachers will share data from the EDAT report, looking at the four modalities of the NYSESLAT to guide effective instruction for our ELL students. PD hours will be logged, collected, and monitored by administration to ensure all teachers receive their 15 % of mandated hours needed for the state requirements. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Part D: Parental Engagement Activities The Title III program strongly encourages parental participation and offers a variety of cultural relevant events for parents of ELL's. It is our belief that students can succeed better in school with parental support. With this in mind, we strive to strengthen the home/school relationship, increase parental participation in all school activities, and make parents partners in the educational process. Parental Engagement activities will serve as a catalyst to encourage and educate parents in the importance of staying involved, increase their knowledge on how to help their children attain high achieving goals. Every month our ENL department will send home a news letter informing parents of educational strategies that they can use to help their children at home, as well as some educational resources and school events. During the upcoming school year, P.S 30 will have functions that are planned and scheduled in accordance to the type of activity taking place. These events will be coordinated around other school functions to avoid scheduling conflicts. Listed below are some of the workshops and functions P.S 30 will be having to promote parent engagement: · · · library) · · · · · pm · · · 9/25/18- Kindergarten family workshop for literacy 1:45 pm-3:45 pm 10/2/18- Kindergarten family workshop for literacy 1:45 pm-3:45 pm 10/4/18- Kindergarten-3rd grade parent workshop for math 1:45 pm-3:45 pm 10/10/18- Take parent to lunch day 11:38 am-12:28 pm 10/18/18- Meeting for 5th grade parents on applying for junior high school 1:45 pm-3:45 9/17/18- Back to School 5pm to 8pm 9/18/18- Pre-K school meeting for parents 1:45 pm-3:45 pm 9/24/18- Library meeting (asking parents to come if they would like to volunteer in 10/23/18- Career Day Kindergarten- 5th 10/26/18 Harvest Day 11/5/18 UFT Parent Meeting 2018-19 CEP 52  1/10/19 Testing workshop for parents with children in grades 3-5 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · Our ENL teachers will stay every Thursday from September 13th to November 15th from 2:30-3:30pm, to prepare materials that will help support our parents throughout the year. In order to achieve these goals we will ensure that the following topics are covered: 1) School wide activities such as learning walks, assemblies, and field trips. These activities will enhance the students’ knowledge of their immediate community, as well as expand their knowledge of additional resources. 2) School wide family events will be held throughout the school year to encourage families regarding the cooperation and involvement in the academic affairs of their children. 3) Encourage parents to attend the Parent Academy this fall. Our ENL teachers will work closely with our Parent Coordinator to inform parents on the event and all that it has to offer. 4) After School Culminating Event- At the end of every school year PS 30’s ENL afterschool program brings families together to celebrate diversity. Parents are asked to bring a dish from their culture to share. This gives families the opportunity to converse, share, and strengthen school relationship. Bringing families together promotes bonding and trustworthiness among the PS 30 community. Parents and children benefit when all parties are actively engaged. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2 certified ENL teacher s at $50.13 per hour for a total of 75 hrs. 1 supervisor @ $56.13 per hours for a total of 57 hrs. Staten Island Children’s Museum for 6 sessions, for 1.5 hour workshops- Total $1,782.00 Notebooks, pencils, snacks, etc. $7,419.60 $1,782.00 $436.30 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $254.90 Travel Raz-kids program (Vocabulary, Writing, and Reading A-Z) 2018-19 CEP 53 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Book for Title III book study- “Building Cultural Competence: Innovative Activities and Models" by Kate Berardo and "The Diversity Training Activity Book: 50 Activities for Promoting Communication and Understanding at Work" by Jonamay Lamber. Purchased 6 books (3 of each) - Total of $119.98 Curriculum Planning for Title III program from 2:30-3:30 once a month- 9 sessions @ $55.13 for 2 certified ENL teacher - total of $992.34 Parent Engagement Planning for the Title III program from 2:30-3:30 on Thursday- 8 sessions @ $55.13 for 3 certified ENL teacher- total of $1,323.12 Other $2,472.20 TOTAL $12365 2018-19 CEP 54  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name PS 30 The Westerleigh School Borough Staten Island School Number 030 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Alan Ihne Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Erica Mulkay Teacher/Subject Area Clare Mitchell Science Teacher/Subject Area Milissa D'antonio Special Educ Related-Service Provider Karen Corbo Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Joseph Napolitano Coach type here School Counselor Jennifer Reich Parent Noeima Neri Parent Coordinator Kathleen Stefanski Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 55  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 829 Total number of ELLs 80 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.65% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Several formal and informal assessments are used to evaluate the literacy skills of students' in grades K-5. TCWRP or Teacher College and Reading Program assessment are administered monthly in order to assess student’s progress in literacy. Our ELL students in grades 3-5 have maintained higher mathematics scores than ELA scores. This trend is seen across the grades as there are more students scoring at a level 3 in mathematics than in ELA. This evidence supports the notion that our ELL’s in the higher grades need to greatly improve their literacy skills, and as a school community of learners, we must continue to analyze data in order to identify and target their weaknesses. The ESL coordinator along with the classroom teachers will be desegregating data that emerges from predictive assessments in order to achieve this goal. These assessments, paired with teacher observations provide insight about students understanding of basic literacy concepts and stages of literacy development. For Early childhood assessment we have begun using NYC Performance Assessments (available in School 2018-19 CEP 56  net). From the most recent disaggregated data, both the ESL teacher and classroom teachers was able to use the data to group students properly for differentiating instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support this effort, our school uses progressive data for capturing methodologies. Through google docs, teachers load student’s scores on three different documents. The three documents include a baseline on demand document (writing process), high preforming students document (process of higher level students) and a low performing student’s document (process of lower level students). This ensures that all students are getting the proper instruction to ascertain and support their academic success. These documents are reviewed daily by administration and teachers. Teachers are provided feedback from administration on how to enrich or support their students. In addition, teachers are given timelines as well as pacing calendars from administration to ensure that scores and data are inputted regularly and accurately. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At P.S 30, we evaluate the success of our program for ELLs by using the informal assessments given throughout the school year. These assessments include the following: test, quizzes, teacher observations, Moby Max, GO Math, Reflex Math, NYC Performance Assessment K-2, and ED Performance 3-5. All these informal assessments are linked by grade level and performance level to the skills that the students are developing in their content areas. The classroom teachers input the results into google docs where administration and teachers can view the information as well. This helps determine how ELLs are doing in ELA and in Math. Our ENL program is also measured by formal assessments, such as the annual student performance of the NYSESLAT, Math and ELA state exams. ELL students are expected to show growth when taking the NYSESLAT in all indicators and move toward higher proficiency levels. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? As mentioned before, we use google docs to analyze summative data once it has been gathered to ensure immediate action. The administration and teachers collaborate on what supports are necessary to help the student improve. Teachers record interventions taking place to support students in area of need. The document is transparent so all administrators and educators in the building can view it at will. This helps teachers plan and collaborate with one another on the proper intervention needed to support students. This may include parent teacher conferences, RTI process, or AIS meetings. . 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school provides our ELLs with academic intervention services by first analyzing the proficiency levels at which the students score on the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL (for new admits). After our school obtains data from the following sources to help determine which students are eligible/chosen for RTI: -PPT Meetings are held Bi-monthly -Students are targeted by the teachers for Tier I using CKLA assessments as well as informal teacher made assessments -Case manager is assigned and cases are disucssed at PPT meetings. -RTI is initiated in classroom and runs for approxinately 4-6 weeks. -Student at Tier 2 (Tier 2 is determined after student shows no progress, and then provided with a literacy expert who then works with a group of 3-5 students, 2-4 times per week) receives "leveled" Fontus and Pinnell" benchmark assessments to drive individual instruction. All this data is captured and assessed on a real time basis based on google docs, where any 2018-19 CEP 57  modifications required enhancing student performance is implemented. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool) is used to evaluate and analyze our ELL program on the areas students need support in. This tool focuses on the progress toward achievement of proficiency for specific subgroups of ELLs. The factors that can be analyzed include home language, grade level, years of ELL service, ELA/math performance and progress, NYSESLAT proficiency and progress, attendance, age, credit accumulation, holdover status, SIFE status, and disability classification. In addition to the EDAT tool we use Google Docs (description described in question 2). The EDAT tool is presented to the school staff by the ENL teachers. The ENL teachers share the data with their collaborating teachers to enhance student learning. This information is used when planning their lessons and student goals. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Every month the ENL teachers along with the Assistant Principal, Joseph Napolitano, share and discuss data and adjustments that are necessary to improve the P.S 30's ENL program. This includes the data on google docs, EDAT tool, and state test scores. This helps our school make programmatic adjustments to better support our ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S 30 provides English Language Leaners with a Freestanding English as a New Language program in grades K-5. Currently, P.S 30 is servicing 80 ELLs. The ENL teacher provides instruction to all ELL students by following CR Part 154 Requirements for ELL students. This determines the amount of minutes and type of instruction the student will receive. Our entering and emerging students are seen eight times a week, half the week is integrated instruction and the other half is stand-alone ENL. Half of their time is being spent in the classroom where the ENL teachers and classroom teachers collaborate and co-teach. The other 4 periods are spent pulling the student out and focusing on ENL strategies. Our transitioning and expanding ELL students receive integrated ENL services four times a week. If an ELL student with proficiency level of transitioning needs stand-alone time as well the ENL teacher makes sure to use the 90 minute flexibility and give the student that instruction. Our commanding students receive their 90 minutes of services twice a week with integrated ENL instruction through a push-in model. For students pulled for stand-alone ENL instruction they are grouped by their grade level. These three groups contain students with entering, emerging, and transitioning proficiency level. When the ENL teachers push into the classroom they team teach with the general education classroom teacher. They work together to make the modifications needed to help ELL students understand the content. The ENL teacher provides language acquisition and vocabulary support. When the ENL teacher pulls out ELL students they receive instruction to help develop English language skills so they can do well in core content instruction. The ENL teacher plans with general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment. 2018-19 CEP 58  b. TBE program. If applicable. At this time we do not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. At this time we do not have a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students receive ENL minutes according to their English proficiency level (as per NYSITELL or NYSESLAT). The ENL teacher follows CR Part 154 Requirements for instructional minutes to meet the mandated minutes and models (integrated or standalone) for each ELL student. As previously stated, based on the students’ proficiency level determines the amount of minutes and model of instruction (stand-alone or integrated) required. The classroom teachers and ENL teachers work together to ensure the proper amount of ELA instruction is given whether it is integrated or stand-alone (depending on students proficiency level). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Both ENL models (integrated and stand-alone) are taught in English in order to convey concepts, especially abstract rather than concrete concepts. A variety of ENL strategies are applied to content area lessons to enable ELL’s to make content more understandable and comprehensible for each grade level. High performance expectations are always expected of our ENL students so grade level material will always be used for instruction in conjunction with ENL Methodologies. Some of these techniques included but are not limited to: -Realia -TPR (Total Physical Response) -Scaffolding -Cooperative Learning Activities -Sheltered English -Learning through artistic expression (music, art, drama) -Multimodality learning experiences (offering visual, tactile, and kinesthetic activities to allow for multiply opportunities for conceptualization) -Offering real life experiences that connect to the curriculum (trips, guest speakers, and performances) - RIGOR, a researched based program based on teaching content vocabulary to ELL”s. While the primary language of instruction is in English, P.S 30 has bilingual dictionaries available in all classrooms in the primary language of their ELL’s (Spanish, Arabic, Chinese and Urdu). - Videos: BrainPop/ BrainPop ESL Lastly, the ENL teacher provides content area support by collaborating with the classroom and content area teacher in order to employ CALLA (Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach) techniques. This modifies how materials are presented to the ELL’s in order to make it more comprehensible for them. Along with using the CALLA method we also use cooperative and smaller learning groups, partner work, differentiation, and modeling techniques while working with the integrated approach. Having the students work together promotes and encourages peer support and increase language. In addition, we use RazKids to support ELLs in reading and encourage language usage. 2018-19 CEP 59  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language the Spanish Lab is administered in the beginning of the year for Spanish students. This determines their proficiency in their Native language. In addition, the ENL teacher works with the testing coordinator to ensure that the following assessments are administered in the student’s native language if necessary: NYS Math test for grades 3rd- 5th and the NYS Science Test for grades 3rd -5th. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At P.S 30, our ENL teachers differentiate instruction for each of the ELL subgroups. A. Currently P.S 30 does not have any SIFE students. In the event that we admit a SIFE student the ENL teacher, classroom teacher, and guidance counselor will work together as a team to create a plan to provide the student with an enriching environment where they can acquire English at their own pace. This will help us as teachers build on the students’ strengths as well as the students’ self-esteem. Prior to this we would follow the SIFE Identification Process (as listed in EPRG Guide), which entails NYSED oral interview questionnaire, NYSED multilingual literacy SIFE screener, and writing screener. Additionally, we will take advantage of the NYSED’s website for the full description of the resources, guidance documents, and the SIFE identification tools. B. Since the newcomer category is quite broad, the strategies used to teach students vary depending on English proficiency levels, grade level, performances on both formal and informal assessments. For new entrants that may have low oral language proficiency skills, the following provisions are set in place for them to acquire English: -ENL lesson are given by the ENL teacher, allowing them the opportunity to learn social aspects of the language that they may not have the opportunity to learn from their classroom environment. -ENL teacher consults and collaborates with the classroom teacher in order to make content area lesson more accessible to the student through visual and tactile cues and activities, i.e.: TPR, using photos or pictures, graphic organizers, etc.. -Developing and using native language literacy skills is encouraged through the use of bilingual dictionaries. For students who are newcomers, yet are proficient in speaking and understanding English, yet struggle with English Literacy and writing, the following programs are used and strategies implemented on their behalf: -Core Knowledge Language Arts, a program used for grades 3-5. The program is used by both the classroom teachers and the ENL teacher in order to provide basic literacy instruction while teaching grade appropriate content area lessons. -Core Knowledge and RazKids is used by the classroom teacher and reinforced by the ENL teacher to improve reading and phonemic awareness as needed. Newcomer ELL students that are in 3rd, 4th, or 5th grade are not required to take the ELA exam, but must take the NYS Math and Science exam. This will introduce newcomers to the NYS test structure. C. For ELL’s receiving service between 4-6 years of service, the ENL teacher reviews test data and speaks with classroom teachers to determine the specific areas of difficultly for each student and formulate a plan. Instruction is then centered on the areas of concentration. Google docs contain student’s data and used for all grades which allow the ENL teacher and classroom teacher to use student data to drive instruction for all ELL students. Extra opportunities for guided reading and writing are offered to ELL’s by the ENL teacher, during the literacy block. Once an ELL is entering their second or third year of service and little progress is being made, they can then begin to receive AIS services as well as SETTS, for additional support. Enrichment activities that incorporate the arts are part of the ENL program as well. These students are also encouraged to attend afterschool programs to receive more focused instruction and small group instruction. In general, reading and writing provide the most difficulty for this age group of ELL’s. In ENL and all across all classes in the upper grades teachers are focusing this year on developing writing skills by engaging students in activities that develop writing stamina and practice in a variety of genres. As they practice writing for a variety of purposes throughout the day students will be prepared not only for the NYSESLAT and ELA test, but also for authentic writing task they will face in the future. The school also uses Core 2018-19 CEP 60  Knowledge Language Arts, a reading program that allows children to develop reading, writing, oral communication, and critical thinking skills needed to become good readers. In addition, Razkidz is offered as a support to help students improve reading. D. To support our long term ELL’s a tiered intervention plan has been established by the Pupil Personnel Team for the ELL’s who are on their 4th year of service or more. This plan is as follows: -The ENL teacher differentiates instruction based on feedback from teachers and service providers (where applicable), formal and informal assessments are used to create lessons based on their individual/group needs. These lessons are generally centered on literacy and or writing, and follow the main tenants of balanced literacy (read aloud, guided reading, and shared reading). -Tier one intervention is when the ESL teacher consults and collaborates with the classroom teachers in order to create a climate which the ELL’s can better access to the curriculum. Together, they plan for ELL’s to learn new concepts through multimodality activities, collaborative learning exercises and through experimental opportunities (trips, art, and guest speakers) - Tier two interventions are generally offered to ELL’s who have been serviced for four years or more include AIS services and are at risk SETTS, during leveled literacy intervention, as well as RAZ-Kids that are implemented to support the students in their effort to master content area instruction. E. Former ELL students who have up to two years after exiting ELL status received a score of commanding on the NYSESLAT. Based off the newly revised requirements for former ELLs, they receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week. Former ELLs still receive their testing accommodations as well for two years on NYS exams. This includes the following: time extension, separate location, and bilingual dictionaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL’s-SWD, use instructional strategies such as small group guided reading, realia, TPR, leveled libraries, listening centers as additional support to our ELL’s with IEP’s. To help the progression of their English language development , small group instruction is provided to model and scaffold activities. The ENL teacher devises and indiudual plan based on assessments, the students IEP goals as well as feedback from the special education teacher and any other service providers they may have. As many of the special needs ELL’s have a language or speech disorder and receive speech and language services, the ENL teacher and the speech teacher often collaboratively plan for effective language goals. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? When setting IEP goals, classroom teachers work with the ENL teachesr to create language goals. In developing an IEP we always strive to place the child in the least restrictive environment. We do this by utilizing flexible programming, and providing supplemental pull out or push in services . Academic intervention services are another way we meet the needs of our ENL population. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers meet regularly to discuss student progress. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. For ELA, Math and other content areas, ELL’s are supported through the incorporation of curriculum in ENL lessons. Classroom and SETTS teacher participate in professional development and confer with the ENL teacher to ensure alignment between methodologies used in both classrooms to create consistency for SIFE, Special Education, and Long Term ELL’s. Targeted interventions that have been implemented to better serve ELL students include, but are not limited to: -Reading Theory: This program helps students improve reading comprehension. It presents assessments to students at a "just right" level. Using algorithmic science coupled with grade and Lexile level information, assessments are always challenging but never discouraging. After just 20 minutes on ReadTheory, students generate enough data to populate their very own progress reports replete with insights about their unique reading abilities. 2018-19 CEP 61  -Guided reading Groups: These groups are designed by the teachers and give the students extra support in reading with a smaller group led by the classroom teacher. -RAZ-Kids: Technology based program targeted for grades k-5 and offers differentiated instruction in literacy and mathematics. It is useful for delivering instruction to our special education, and ELL’s who scores are advanced, intermediate proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT. -At-Risk SETTS, offers differentiated instruction based on grade and ability level in Math and Reading. -MobyMax: MobyMax finds and fixes learning gaps with the power of personalized learning in K-5 subjects including math, reading, ELA, writing, science, & social studies. The aforementioned services are delivered in English; however, native language materials (dictionaries in native languages) are made available to the students in order to support native language arts, along with English interventions. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Currently P.S 30 is not getting any new programs or considering any for this upcoming school year. Based on our data in google docs the programs we are currently using (listed above) have shown to be effective. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? P.S 30 has not had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are offered equal access to all school programs by invitation, recommendation, and purposeful request. Notification is sent home in parent’s preferred home language and informed by school staff (translator or over the phone interpretation utilized) to enusre our ELL families are informed on the programs offered. ELLs who have not yet reached proficiency are targeted to receive additional help through several programs offered here at our school. These include; AIS, SETTS, and an After School ENL Enrichment program. These programs provide the students with help mainly in ELA and Math, focusing on their areas of weakness. In addition, our ELLs are involved in array of activities including student council, after school center sports (basketball sponsored by NYCID), the Zoo program (Casagrant- city counsel), and holiday fairs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. At P.S 30 we use a variety of programs and instructional materials to support our ELLs. Some language materials we use are BrainPOP ESL, Starfall, and Spotlight on English. These programs are incorporated into classroom lessons as well as extra support. BrainPOP ESL is an online comprehensive English language learning program that uses animated movies to model conversational English while introducing grammar concepts and vocabulary words. The movies are leveled, with each new movie and associated features building upon earlier ones. Each movie reinforces vocabulary, grammar, pronunciation, reading comprehension, and writing skills. The scaffolding of the movies enables students to master the language progressively, giving them the confidence they need to read, write, and speak English. Starfall is an online program developed to teach children to read with phonics. This program uses a systematic approach, in addition with audiovisual interactivity, which is perfect for kindergarten, first grade, second grade, special education, and English language development. Spotlight on English is a program that provides “approaching” and “on level” ELA reading passages, vocabulary building component, and differentiated instructional strategies. This program addresses the varying levels of student’s performance. This program is not online and is mainly used during ENL instruction. For ELA we use RazKids, Readworks, Read Theory, and MobyMax. All These programs are online and used as a support for all students, including ELLs. The programs we use for math are Reflex math and Envision Math. Both of these programs are online and used as a support in the classroom and at home. 2018-19 CEP 62  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our ELL students receive native language support through the use of library books, English/native language dictionaries, English/native language picture dictionaries and a buddy system. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our School ensures all required services and resources to support and correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels by following each students mandated minutes based on their proficiency level (CR Part 154). During stand-alone instruction (pull out) we group students based off their proficiency levels and grade level to insure effective instruction. Additionally, if a student has an IEP we make sure the students are getting all services and supports stated in the students’ IEP. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S 30 shares space with District 75. Currently none of our district 75 students are ELLs. In the case of one of the students being an ELL their district would provide that student with an ENL teacher to give them their mandated services. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). P.S 30 has a variety of activities that assist newly enrolled students as well as for our newly enrolled ELLS. These activities are held throughout the year. Our Parent Coordinator holds one on one or a group orientation meeting for all new admits throughout the year. If needed, she provides translators. She also gives parents a walk-through of the school and invites them to the PTA meetings. In addition, she provides a buddy system for new families (if possible, another parent who speaks their native language) to help them feel welcomed and assist them with any questions they have. During the walk through she introduces parents to staff member that could help assist them with anything and gives them information in their native language. The guidance counselor attends ENL orientation meetings for newly enrolled ELLs and informs them on what she does and how she can assist them if needed. The schools guidance councelor also has several workshops throughout the years for parents and students inviting them to learn about applying for middle schools and the middle school process. In addition, she connects families to outside community agencies (if necessary) and provides at risk counselors for students exhibiting a hard time transitioning in their new setting to help them feel safe, welcomed and supported. In October the guidance counselor has a meeting to inform parents about the middle school fair and registering process. Translators are present if necessary. In addition our guidance counselor hands out additional information regarding middle school throughout the year in preferred language. Fifth grade teachers work to prepare all students, including ELL’s for the middle school settings, and are supported in their endeavors by attending professional development that targets middle school standards and curriculum. This allows the teachers to prepare units and lessons that match the new level of academic rigor that will be required of the students in middle school. For ELL’s in particular, fifth grade teachers are trained in using strategies that increases academic language since this becomes increasingly important as they enter middle school. Also, fifth grade teachers are well informed of the various programs available in the middle schools. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time all 5th grade are offered Spanish classes (including ELLs). 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 CEP 63 Paste reAt this time the school does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In order to meet the needs of our ELL population, it is imperative that the ENL and classroom teachers plan appropriate academic strategies. It is for this reason that professional development focus on the importance of planning long term goals for our ELL’s as well as academic language development in all content areas. Our ENL department will provide Professional Developments to teachers that have ELLs through a weekly book talk. Those teachers will turnkey the information to the other teachers on their grade. Teachers will be provided with professional developments that will show them various teaching strategies that will be implemented in the classrooms to help each student broaden their base of cognitive academic language, and reach their full potential. Some of these techniques are, but not limited to: -Sheltered English, scaffolding, cooperative learning, grouping, and project models. The special education teachers underwent and will continue to receive professionally development in new programs for struggling readers that has been purchased to supplement their normal classroom programs. We will be providing ENL professional development during the Monday professional development block. During Monday PD, the ENL department will work alongside the IEP Coordinator to implement ENL strategies into professional development trainings that are provided. To that end, the ENL teacher works collaboratively with the classroom teacher to further develop language skills and modalities employing the CALLA (Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach) method as well. The ENL department, is available to arrange demonstration lessons, on-site professional development sessions with the classroom teacher throughout the year. In addition, we have launched a school wide effort to address the listening and speaking portions of the Common Core Standards. As the relationship between oral language skills and literacy is strong, we recognize the importance of bolstering the oral language proficiency and listening comprehension of all our students in order to boost their academic based vocabulary as well as their reading comprehension skills. Lastly, the ENL department will be turn-keying information about the most current methods of teaching ELL’s and aligning instruction with the new Common Core Curriculum. Our ENL teachers attend PDs regularly with the Staten Island Borough Field Support Office. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Administration will be providing ENL professional development for their teachers during the Monday professional development block. During Monday PD, the ENL department will lead a book study, “50 Strategies for Teaching English Language Learners” by Adrienne L. Herrel and Michael Jordan. Teachers who have ELLs will attend these PDs. Teachers will turnkey the information they learn during these professional developments to the other teachers on their grade. Our ENL teachers regularly attend PDs offered by the Staten Island Field Support System. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At P.S 30 the ENL teachers set up parent meetings on Tuesdays during parent involvement (2:30-3:35) throughout the year. The ENL teachers set up appointments by calling home (using translator or over the phone interpretation if needed) and 2018-19 CEP 64  written notification. Meetings are recorded with a sign in sheet (one for each grade) and kept in a parent meeting binder. If a parent cannot make it on a Tuesday we work with them to set a time and day that is better for them or have a phone conference. To confirm phone conference a letter is sent home with the student to get parents signature to confirm meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S 30 serves a community with a rich tradition of school involvement. The P.S. 30 PTA is vibrant and the parents are involved in planning several events and fundraisers to enhance the quality of the student’s educational and social experiences to create a unique and special school environment for their children. All parents, including the parents of our ELL’s are encouraged to be actively involved. Family events sponsored by the PTA occur regularly throughout the school year. The parent coordinator is always available at these events. DOE issued posters are displayed informing parents of their rights to translated materials. Staff members fluent in parent’s native language provide translation services and the over the phone interpretation is utilized as well. Within the past year P.S 30 has noticed an increase in parent involvement from our ELL families. Many of them have been participating in the following activities held throughout the year: - Monthly workshops (translator provided if needed) - Title III afterschool Events - PTA meetings - Shows and assemblies In addition, P.S 30 is now offering free English Classes for parents. These classes will be held from September 19, 2017 to June 21, 2018 (every Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday) from 3 pm-5:30 pm. These classes are provided by the JCC. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Alan Ihne, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S 30 The Westerleigh School School DBN: 31R030 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Alan Ihne Title Principal Joseph Napolitano Assistant Principal Kathie Stefanski Parent Coordinator Erica Mulkay Noeima Neri ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Clare Mitchell Teacher/Subject Area Milissa D'Antonio Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Jennifer Reich School Counselor Anthony Lodico Karen Corbo N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Karen Corbo Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 N/A N/A 9/25/17 1/1/01 9/25/17 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R030 School Name: PS 30 Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kathie Erica Stefanski Mulkay Parent Coordinator ELL teacher Yes No Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2018-19 CEP 68  P.S 30 will use the following data and methodologies to assess language preference of the parent community for both written and oral communication: a. After parents complete the Home Language Identification Survey our English as New Language (ENL) teachers will obtain a copy for their personal records and share Part III of the HLIS with the student’s classroom teachers. This way our staff knows if a translator or translation for school created parent communications and other documents are needed for the parents. We will utilize the translation services by requesting translators, using over-the-phone interpretation, and getting documents translated by using the free translation services offered by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. In addition, P.S 30 will utilizing school staff members who are proficient in the home language of the students to provide translations when it is not feasible for the interpretation unit to complete the translation on time. b. P.S 30 will run the RCPL report on ATS to gather parent’s preferred written and oral language. c. Parents will receive student emergency contact cards in their preferred language. If a parent’s preferred language is not available we will utilize the over-the-phone translation to communicate the information to them. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1. English 1. 1322 91.42 1. 1312 1. 90.73 2. Spanish 3. Urdu 4. Arabic 5. Chinese 6. Polish 7. Mahalayam 8. Mandarin 9. Albanian 10. Khmer 11. Ukranian 12. Sinahlese N/A 2. 65 3. 12 4. 13 5. 24 6. 0 7. 1 8. 0 9. 6 10. 2 11. 0 12. 1 N/A 4.5 0.83 0.9 1.66 0 0.07 0 0.41 0.14 0 0.07 N/A 2. 68 3. 15 4. 13 5-15 6. 3 7. 1 8. 9 9. 6 10. 2 11. 1 12. 1 N/A 2. 4.7 3. 1.04 4. 0.9 5-1.04 6. 0.21 7. 0.07 8. 0.62 9. 0.41 10. 0.14 11. 0.07 12. 0.07 N/A 2018-19 CEP 69  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Currently there are no languages that represent at least 10% of our school population, excluding the listed languages. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you plan to translate? Include Distributed to procedures to ensure timely provision of Families translated documents to parents. Parent Teacher Conferences NYC Code of Discipline ELL Parent Orientation Parent Survey and Selection Form Title III Invitation Graduation Dates Report Cards Individualized Educational Plan (IEP) ELL/ELA/MATH Summer School NYSESLAT Information Latchkey notices Parent Handbook Important in house Letters September, November, March, May September September September October June October, January, March, June Monthly June March/April September/June September September-June NYC DOE Intranet Templates NYC DOE Office of ELLs NYC DOE Office of ELLs NYC DOE Office of ELLs Translation Unit Translation Unit Pupil Path Translation Unit NYC DOE NYC DOE Translation Unit Translation Unit Translation Unit 2018-19 CEP 70  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 71  N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May Intake Process and Registration Procedures IEP Meetings Phone Conferences/ Calls to Parents Guidance Meetings Back to school night Anytime Monthly Anytime Monthly September provide interpretation service(s)? Our Bilingual Educational Assistants are hired for per session work for the evening conferences. Languages that are spoken by school personal include Arabic and Spanish. Additionally, we utilize the NYC Translation Unit during these conferences (over-the-phone or translators). The ENL teachers utilize the NYC Translation Unit. Our Bilingual Educational Assistants are present during the meetings. If the personal or preferred language is not available we will utilize the NYC Translation Unit. NYC Translation Unit NYC Translation Unit or Bilingual Educational Assistant 2018-19 CEP 72  N/A N/A N/A Our Bilingual Educational Assistants are hired for per session work for the evening. Languages that are spoken by school personal include Arabic and Spanish. Additionally, we utilize the NYC Translation Unit during these conferences (over-the-phone or translators). N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have the global connect system which can send texts and be translated into other languages. We also utilize our website which can also be translated into other languages. In addition, we have staff members who are proficient in Spanish and Arabic the reach out to parents over the phone or we utilize the NYC Translation Unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will review the goals of the regulation at the beginning of the school year during faculty conferences. In addition, we will meet with ENL teachers separately to ensure they are aware of the goal. The resources available are the parent coordinator and assistance from the FSC. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At P.S 30 there is a large poster in the lobby and main office that has a statement in every language that tells the parents that they are entitled to the Translation and Interpretation Services provided by New York City. 2018-19 CEP 73  Our LAC Coordinators distribute Language Access support brochures, flyers, and letters to parents. In addition, they distribute “I-Speak” cards to the staff. These cards will be displayed during parent teacher conferences and other meetings (Part B, 2) so they can identify the parents preferred language. During our Parent Orientation our ENL teachers and LAC Coordinators will inform parents about the Translation Unit and their right to receive information in their preferred language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our LAC Coordinators creates a Parent Survey asking parents if they would like to volunteer for any school functions or join the PTA. In addition it asks parents for feedback on the school. 2018-19 CEP 74 
