2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R032 School Name: P.S. 032 THE GIFFORD SCHOOL Principal: NANCY SPATARO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P.S. 32 The Gifford School 353100010032 Pre-Kindergarten – 5 th Grade School Number (DBN): 31R032 232 Barlow Ave Staten Island, NY 10308 (718)984-1688 (718)227-5736) Fax: Email Address: ESchult2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: Evy Schultz School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Nancy Spataro-Bellocchio Christine Beck Trisha Altuna-Byrnes JospehineCoco N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 31 VincenzaGallasio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island, NY 10301 Superintendent’s Office Address: VGallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)420-5667 Phone Number: (718)420-5667 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: 31 Executive Director’s Office Address: Kevin Moran Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island, NY 10301 KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-755-7339 Phone Number: 718-556-8375 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Nancy Spataro-Bellocchio Christine Beck Trisha Altuna-Byrnes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Dawn Cassara Dena Galvin Josephine Coco Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Diane Silvestro Christine Milano Tara Scarpelli Krista Anderson Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of our school is to create a community of administrators, teachers and students who will afford a nurturing and comprehensive educational plan. We will empower all who will participate to take ownership of their educational experience and future through a collaborative effort and design. The PS 32R's vision is reflective of creating high performance standards that are aligned with New York City and State mandates resulting in the optimum level of student achievement. We celebrate learning by recognizing each individual student’s talents and abilities. We will provide an environment in which all of our children will reach their 2018-19 CEP 9  highest potential. We have high expectations. Students will develop important decision-making, critical thinking, technological skills and the ability to communicate effectively. Students are independent and articulate learners who enjoy taking responsibility and ownership of their learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 32R is located in the Great Kills section of Staten Island , New York . This pre-kindergarten to fifth grade school services a population of approximately 700 students. The children of PS 32R are educated in a nurturing and enriching environment. The school building is a well-kept modern building built in 1965. Major electrical upgrades have been provided for the students including new wiring for the gym which will allow video and audio enhancements. A new floor in the gym has been completed several years ago. PS 32R actively implements the Special Education Initiative to address students’ individual needs as well as address the needs of our English Language Learners. The special education and ELL programs both emphasize student achievement, student success, and personalized support. Students of PS32R will continue a program that is characterized by an integrated interdisciplinary approach to instruction. The integration of the performing arts, STEM, visual arts, social studies, technology, and science are the hallmarks of our cluster program. Our music program continues with one fourth grade band, one fifth grade band, a violin program for our third and fourth graders, and a recorder program for the second grade. Grades K-5 enjoy the benefits of learning to read music. We employ a full-time music teacher. The school continues an Enrichment through the Arts and Sciences program. (ETAS) This program effectively engages third through fifth grade students. Students participate in small group arts enrichment. There is a fifth grade Technology Team. There are many different specialties that include but not limited to Science Expo, Debate Team, Logic Problems/Sudoku, Yoga/Meditation, Art, Computers, Technology, Visual Arts, Math & Art Connection, and Dance. During the school year our visual arts teacher invites parents and students to create art together during scheduled “Arts Nights" as well as parent workshops with the principal.” There is also Story Night and Math Night! An informative parent handbook contains information on dates and school procedures. The handbook includes performance standards and rubrics for each grade. Parents and students are aware of the school's high expectations and are fully involved in the goal setting process. PS 32 supports parents and provides well-planned support for them that enable them to understand their children’s achievements. PS 32R has developed partnerships in the community and enjoys collaboration with many organizations from the cultural and educational sector. Some of these resources include: Dancing Classrooms, Architecture, Snug Harbor, Blue Heron Park, Richmondtown Restoration, The Staten Island Institute of Arts and Science, The St. George Theatre, Gateway National Park, The Staten Island Children’s Museum, and Fleet Week. Various jazz groups perform at our school each year. Our school participates in many school and community events such as: Penny Harvest, Coat Drive, Second and Third Grade Recorder Concerts, Fourth and Fifth Grade Band Concerts/Dancing Classrooms Performances, Weather Net Station, Buehler Space Program, March of Dimes Mini-Walk, Project Hospitality Toy and Can Drive, College of Staten Island Presentations, and Annual Dance Festival. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school houses 3(three) full-day pre-k, 4 (four) kindergarten classes including 1 (one) ICT class, 4 (four) first grades classes including 1 ((one) ICT class, 4 (four) second grade classes including 1 (one) ICT class, 3 (three) third grade classes including 1 (one) ICT class, 3 (three) fourth grade classes including 1 (one) ICT classes, 4 (four) fifth grade classes including 1 (one) ICT class. PS 32 has 1 (one) 12:1:1 self -contained classes and 2 (two) 12:1 classes. There will be a freestanding ELL program for grades K-5 which serves our English Language Learners. The average class size in kindergarten is 23. The average class size in first grade is 25, second grade is 26, third grade is 31, fourth grade is 30 2018-19 CEP 10  and fifth grade is 26. Our focus for the special student population is have them think on a higher level and deepen their understanding for grade level standards. P.S. 32R also implements a SETSS program. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Upon review of the 2018 New York State English Language Arts State Test, we will be focusing on several different standards. One of our foci will be on inferencing and providing text evidence to support their reasoning. Students will need to explain events, procedures, ideas, or concepts in a historical, scientific, or technical text, including what happened and why, based on specific information in the text. In addition to the above mentioned key areas of focus, the students will also determine two or more main ideas in a text and explain how they are supported by key ideas details and summarize the text. Assessment and differentiated instruction are also a school-wide focus this year. Through parent engagement, the students, staff and parents will work collaboratively to make academic strides in their reading, writing and math goals. We will continue to work on explaining how an author uses reasons and evidence to support particular points in a text, identifying which reasons and evidence support which point. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R032 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 674 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 54 55 28 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 54 11 30 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 32.0% % Attendance Rate 28.8% % Reduced Lunch 3.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 15.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 75.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.09 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 63.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 93% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 70 68 93.6% 3.3% 26.4% 0.7% 6.4% 2.1% 6 0% 9.7 58.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the Quality Review, 1.1, Rigorous instruction, our school ensures engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned Common Core Learning Standards and/or content strands. This was evident by the administration communicating clear expectations and school goals through memorandum, faculty conferences, and professional development. After analyzing Danielson's MOTP Rating (September 2018), we will be focusing on formative and summative assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 86% of the teaching staff (31 out of 36 teachers) will receive an overall rating of "effective" or higher on Danielson component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) as measured by formal and informal observations. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Common Preps, Weekly Grade Meetings, Weekly Inquiry Team Meetings, Tuning Protocol, Faculty Meetings, Chancellor’s Professional Development Conference Days, Common Planning Time, and Weekly Professional Development ● Guidance – Each student has a specified person and/or someone they trust to go to for counseling and support, Student Council, Student Advisory Team, Anti-Bullying Contests/Posters/Assemblies, Health & Nutrition Assemblies to support Self-Esteem and Healthy Habits All needs for all subgroups will be addressed through guided reading and differentiated instruction. Teachers will attend professional development on formative assessment strategies to implement in their classroom. ● Representation on the School Leadership Team, Teachers provide written goal/progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of the child’s progress, School newsletter is distributed to keep our parents informed about upcoming events. Weekly/Ongoing Parent Engagement, Parent Orientation Meeting – Parent school activities and academic information, School website is updated weekly. The website offers various helpful academic websites along with various monthly student incentives (i.e. assemblies, essay contest). Homework is posted on a daily basis for all classes, Parent Workshops on topics such as CCLS, Test Taking Techniques, DOK , Parent Support Group, Monthly PTA Meetings and Newsletter, Environmental Surveys 2x per year, School-wide Special Events/Fairs , Monthly Parent Surveys asking what workshops they would like to attend , Classroom and Grade Celebrations including Culminating Activities, Thank You Breakfast, Parent Support Group, School Brochure, Parent Handbook, Entire Staff Sept. 2018 to June 2019 for all mentioned below. Administration, All Teachers (Classroom, Cluster, ESL, SETSS) Ongoing , Weekly Planning Time and Inuiry Team Meetings, Daily On going Basis RFA Week Common Sense Media Curriculum Monthly Meetings, Monthly Calendars, Monthly Update of School Website, Monthly Parents Workshops/Activities 2018-19 CEP 14 School Messenger System – an automated, computer based calling system that delivers school-wide messages to parents, FAM Parent Link and Support, Parent Workshops with Principal, and Weekly Parent Meetings/Communication 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September 2018, teachers will meet with the parents/guardians to discuss the curriculum for the year. Also, teachers will meet with the parents/guardians on an on-going basis to discuss the success of each student (Sept. 2018 through June 2019) . All teachers in the school will be involved in this along with the Guidance Counselor, IEP Teacher, Speech Teachers, OT/PT Teachers, School Assessment Team along with the administration. This will occur from September 2018 til June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Journeys, Fundations, Wilson, Go Math, SETSS, AIS Push-In, ELL Push-In/Out, and Orton-Gillingham, Core Instructional and IM[pact Team will (Administration and teachers) meet periodically after school to plan accordingly. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 40% of the teachers (18 out of 36) will be rated Effective. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance Dashboard Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As per the NYC School Survey, teachers and parents both feel that the school creates a culture that engages students to support one another and also provides for the students social and emotional growth. ● Peer Conflict Resolution ● Fill a Bucket Student Incentive - Students need to be respectful to each other ● Use School Quality Snapshot ● Safety Star School Shirt ● Student Advisory Team (Grades K-4) ● Student Council - (Grade 5) ● Order and Discipline School Spirit Fridays Self- Esteem Lessons Anti-Bullying Assemblies Respect For All Student of the Month Citizen of the Month Perfect Attendance Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 16  By June 2019, 91% of the teaching staff (33 out of 36 teachers) will receive an overall rating of "effective" or higher on Danielson component 2a (Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport) as measured by formal and informal observations 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development on Danielson Domain 2, Discipline Code, Intra-visitations, Administrative Support, 1:1 Conferences, Counseling for Students in Need, SAT Team Support, Weekly Parent Meetings/Communication Representation on the School Leadership Team, Teachers provide written goal/progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of the child’s progress, School newsletter is distributed to keep our parents informed about instruction, assessments, assemblies and upcoming events. Weekly/Ongoing Parent Engagement, Parent Orientation Meeting – Tea with Administration, Parent school activities and academic information, School website is updated weekly. The website offers various helpful academic websites along with various monthly student incentives (i.e. poster contest, essay contest). Homework is posted on a daily basis for all classes, Parent Workshops on topics such as CCLS, Test Taking Techniques, DOK , Parent Support Group, Book Study/Talk, Monthly PTA Meetings and Newsletter, Environmental Surveys 2x per year, School wide Special Events/Fairs , Monthly Parent Surveys asking what workshops they would like to attend , Classroom and Grade Celebrations including Culminating Activities, Thank You Breakfast, Parent Support Group, School Brochure, Parent Handbook, School Messenger System – an automated, computer based calling system that delivers school wide messages to parents, FAM Parent Link and Support, Parent Workshops with the principal, and Weekly Parent Meetings/Communication 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration, All Teachers (Classroom, Cluster, ESL, SETSS) Entire Staff Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Weekly Professional Development, On going Professional Conversations, Weekly Planning Time Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Monthly Meetings, Monthly Calendars, Monthly Update of School Website, Monthly Parents Workshops/Activities How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 18  In September 2018, teachers will meet with the parents/guardians to discuss the curriculum for the year. Also, teachers will meet with the parents/guardians on an on-going basis to discuss the success of each student. Family Engagement activities are provided during the day as well as after school hours to address student needs and educational expectations to enhance our school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Administration, Psychologist, Social Worker Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of the teaching staff (18 out of 36 teachers) will receive an overall rating of "effective" or higher on Danielson component 2a (Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport) as measured by formal and informal observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Teacher Level MOTP Report, MOSL - Performance Tasks Advance Dashboard Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per our Quality Review, our school has established a culture of high expectations for staff and students, ensuring rigorous learning and a foundation for college and career readiness which are embedded in every learning experience. According to the 2017-2018 Advance reports, 89% of the teachers were rated effective and/or highly effective in Danielson Framework for Teaching in Domain 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction).  Advance MOTP Data ● Surveys - Professional Development Needs (Teachers identify what their areas of weakness are and what professional developments they need) ● Analysis of Student Work in Math, Running Records and Writing ● Self Reflection Checklists - The teachers' strengths,weakness, and the areas in which improvement is needed. ● NYSELAT ● Ongoing Student Data - Students strengths and weaknesses in all subject areas ● Pre/Post Benchmark Assessments - Measure how the student progressed from September to June ● Informal/Formal Observations Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all members of the two Core School Impact Teams will be the facilitators of professional development, activities, such as, writing workshop, reading workshop and components of A4A/NTN. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). guided Reading and planning multiple entry points to meet the needs if all our learners, Formative & Summative Assessments will drive our Professional Development, Universal Design of Learning, RTI, Data Analysis, Representation on the School Leadership Team, Teachers provide written goal/progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of the child’s progress, School newsletter is distributed to keep our parents informed about upcoming events, Weekly/Ongoing Parent Engagement, Parent Orientation Meeting - Parent school activities and academic information, School website is updated weekly. The website offers various helpful academic websites along with various monthly student incentives (i.e. poster contest, essay contest). Homework is posted on a daily basis for all classes, Parent Workshops on topics such as CCLS, Test Taking Techniques, DOK , Parent Support Group, Monthly PTA Meetings and Newsletter, Environmental Surveys 2x per year, School-wide Special Events/Fairs , Monthly Parent Surveys asking what workshops they would like to attend , Classroom and Grade Celebrations including Culminating Activities, Thank You Breakfast, Parent Support Group, School Brochure, Parent Handbook, School Messenger System – an automated, computer based calling system that delivers school wide messages to parents, FAM Parent Link and Support, Parent Workshops with Administration, and Weekly Parent Meetings/Communication Administration, All Teachers Entire Staff Ongoing monthly collection of student work for data analysis, (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) Weekly Professional Development (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) Weekly Planning Time (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) Weekly Inquiry Team Meetings (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) Monthly Meetings (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) Monthly Calendars (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) 2018-19 CEP 21  Monthly Update of School Website (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) Weekly Parents Workshops/Activities (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September 2018, teachers will meet with the parents/guardians to discuss the curriculum for the year. Also, teachers will meet with the parents/guardians on an on-going basis to discuss the success of each student. Family Engagement activities are provided during the day as well as after school hours to address student needs and educational expectations to enhance our school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, Professional Development, Danielson Framework for Teaching, Think Central, Journeys Go Math , Technology, Wilson, Orton-Gillingham, Differentiated Instruction, Updating Rubrics Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of the teaching staff (18 out of 36 teachers) will receive an overall rating of "effective" or higher on Danielson component 2a (Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport) as measured by formal and informal observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 22  Advance Teacher Level MOTP Report Advance Dashboard Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per our Quality Review, we have expanded the current teacher team structure to systematically analyze classroom practices across grades and subjects, resulting in refinement to pedagogy and mastery of learning goals for groups of students. Acording to Advance, 41% of teachers were rated highly effective as their overall rating in the 2017-2018 school year. ● 1:1 Meeting ● Authentic Conversations ● Observation Feedback ● Needs Assessment Survey ● Professional Checklists ● Analysis of Student Work Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 2% increase of highly effective teachers by the administration supporting the instructional practice of teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching, formal and informal observations, and also giving actionable feedback. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration, All Teachers (Classroom, Cluster, ESL, SETSS)  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development on "SOLVE" and "CUBES", Impact Team Meetings, Instructional Programs include Journeys and Go Math, Inquiry Work/Protocols, Sharing Best Practices, Implementation of Next Steps, Growth in Danielson Framework for Teaching, Actionable Feedback for Next Steps, Universal Design of Learning, RTI, AA/NTN, scaffolding of tasks to address student with special needs, English Language Learners, and an Assistant Principal analyzing student data with next steps addressed. Representation on the School Leadership Team, Teachers provide written goal/progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of the child’s progress, School newsletter is distributed to keep the parents updated on instruction, assessments, and assemblies. Weekly/Ongoing Parent Engagement, Parent Orientation Meeting – Tea with Administration, Parent school activities and academic information, School website had an interactive component that parents/guardians can write to our Parent Coordinator. The website offers various helpful academic websites along with various monthly student incentives (i.e. assemblies, essay contest). Homework is posted on a daily basis for all classes, Parent Workshops on topics such as CCLS, Test Taking Techniques, DOK , Parent Support Group, Book Study/Talk, Monthly PTA Meetings and Newsletter, Environmental Surveys 2x per year, School-wide Special Events/Fairs , Monthly Parent Surveys asking what workshops they would like to attend , Classroom and Grade Celebrations including Culminating Activities, Thank You Breakfast, Parent Support Group, School Brochure, Parent Handbook, School Messenger System – an automated, computer based calling system that delivers school wide messages to parents, FAM Parent Link, and Support, Parent Workshops with the principal , and Weekly Parent Meetings/Communication Entire Staff Monthly ongoing collection of student work for data analysis (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) Weekly Professional Development (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) Weekly Planning Time(Sept. 2018 - June 2019) Weekly Inquiry Team Meetings (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) Monthly Meetings (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) Monthly Calendars, (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) 2018-19 CEP 25  Monthly Update of School Website (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) Weekly Parents Workshops/Activities (Sept. 2018 - June 2019) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September 2018, teachers will meet with the parents/guardians to discuss the curriculum for the year. Also, teachers will meet with the parents/guardians on an on-going basis to discuss the success of each student. All teachers in the school will be involved in this along with the Guidance Counselor, IEP Teacher, Speech Teachers, OT/PT Teachers, School Assessment Team along with the administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Updating Rubrics, Danielson Framework of Teaching, Administration, Think Central, Journeys, Go Math, Fundations, Wilson, Orton-Gillingham, Technology Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Mid Point Benchmark – Advance Teacher Level MOTP Report and Advance Dashboard Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOSL - Peformance Tasks 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Quality Review, we received a well developed in establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families. This was contributed to family workshops, school website, newsletters and progress reports indicating student goals. As per the Environmental Survey, 93% of our parents are satisfied with the education their child is receiving. This is slightly lower than the district average of 94%. Parent Surveys throughout the school year (Ongoing) Weekly Communication with Parents (Ongoing) Monthly Parent Support workshops (Ongoing) Environmental Survey (March 2018) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 2% increase in parent engagement from the previous school year, measured by P.T.A Meetings attendance, parent workshop attendance, evening events attendance, and the Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration, PTA Weekly throughout the 2018-2019 school year Monthly Calendar updates (Website and paper) Monthly/ Weekly Parent Workshops YMCA After School Program, Guest Speakers, Monthly Meetings, SLT Input and Feedback, School Community Representation on the School Leadership Team, Teachers provide written goal/progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of the child’s progress, School newsletter is distributed to keep our parents informed about Parent Resource Room that includes a plethora of books and magazines along with instructional materials for parents/guardians, Weekly/Ongoing Parent Engagement, Parent Orientation Meeting – Tea with Administration, Parent school activities and academic information, School website is updated on a weekly basis. The website offers various helpful academic websites along with various monthly student incentives (i.e. assemblies, essay contest). Homework is posted on a daily basis for all classes, Over 60 Parent Workshops on topics such as CCLS, Test Taking Techniques, DOK , Parent Support Group, Book Study/Talk, Monthly PTA Meetings and Newsletter, Environmental Surveys 2x per year, Schoolwide Special Events/Fairs , Monthly Parent Surveys asking what workshops they would like to attend , Classroom and Grade Celebrations including Culminating Activities, Thank You Breakfast, Parent Support Group, School Brochure, Parent Handbook, School Messenger System – an automated, computer based calling system that delivers school wide messages to parents, FAM Parent Link and Support, Parent Workshops with the principal, and Weekly Parent Meetings/Communication 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Fair Student Funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Mid Point Benchmark (February 2018) – Increase in the number of parents attending various workshops/meetings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Increase in the number of parents attending various workshops/meetings compared to the previous school year Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Not Meeting Grade Level Standards Running records Teacher observations and checklists - Ongoing Baseline & Mid Year Assessments Unit Assessment from Reading Program Conferencing notes IEP Mandates Not Meeting Grade Level Standards Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group Instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During and After the School Day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Instruction provided to small groups of students by teachers in ELA. Fundations, Wilson,Balanced Literacy, Push In AIS Program (Grades K-5), After Schhol Tutoring Program 2x per week Small group instruction, Push In AIS Program (Grades K-5) Small Group Instruction During and After the School Day 2018-19 CEP 31  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Baseline, Unit, and End of Year Assessments Teacher observations and checklists - Ongoing All Students Teacher assigned unit tests Teacher observations and checklists - Ongoing All Students Teacher assigned unit tests Teacher observations and checklists - Ongoing Anyone that Needs Support - As Needed Teacher observations and checklists - Ongoing Teacher/Parent Request Reading in the Content Area Small Group Instruction During the School Day Reading in the Content Area Small Group Instruction During the School Day 1:1, Small Group Instruction During the School Day The school guidance counselor provides one on one services as well as meets with students in a small groups addressing the following skills: social, peer socialization, boundaries, appropriate classroom behavior, 2018-19 CEP 32  and compliance with authority The school psychologist provides one on one service to students as needed. These services include but not limited to social emotional functioning, trauma, counseling, anxiety, anger management, and grief and bereavement. Parent Support Group – 1x -2x per month 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 (Zero) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Approximately $5,000 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 37  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 38   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 32R, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS32 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 41  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 32, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2018-19 CEP 42  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 44  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name The Gifford School Borough Staten Island School Number 032 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Nancy Spataro Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Caroline Coraci Teacher/Subject Area Kathy Scarpati/Kindergarten Teacher/Subject Area Carmen Sortino/1 st grade Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Jodi Rosenberg Coach n/a School Counselor Nicole Stentella Parent Trisha-Hana Byra Parent Coordinator Michele Mancuso Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 47  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 619 Total number of ELLs 20 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.23% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. The assessment tools our school uses to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs include: TCRWP (Teacher's College Model) which includes running records, reading accuracy, fluency, reading comprehension; the NYSESLAT exam that evaluates: reading, writing, listening and speaking skills and groups students homogenously (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, commanding) within regular classes in order to provide appropriate integrated and stand alone ENL services, the NYSITELL assesses potential ELLs in their English proficiency; Balanced Literacy which uses guided reading and small group instruction which helps to evaluate reading and writing skills; teacher created exams to assess reading and math skills. We will also use the newly adapted Houghton Mifflin Harcourt's "Journeys" reading program and its assessments. The results from the Journeys Assessments will be shared with classroom and ENL teacher. They will both collaborate and discuss plans of actions to help the ELL students with any areas that were weak from their assessments. Furthermore, this Journeys program helps the 2018-19 CEP 48  ELL students by giving suggestions to the teacher in the teacher's edition for English Language support in each lesson that targets the ELL populations in all levels (from emerging to expanding). The Journeys program also comes with an Instructional Cards Kit that contains vocabulary in context cards, high frequency word cards, story retelling cards, alphabet picture and letter cards. This kit is utilized daily by the ENL and classroom teacher to reinforce the English Language. It is a valuable resource. The Grades 3-5 will also utilize City/State tests, Acuity, NYSTART. All of these assessment tools and data will help to identify specific student needs and align instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2. We have monthly data meetings to assess how the students are progressing. Depending on the results, we will implement appropriate interventions that are needed. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 3. We will evaluate the success of our program with ELLs by analyzing the results of the NYSESLAT exam and comparing results of each child from year to year to see if the child is progressing to the next level (example: from low intermediate/emerging to intermediate/transitioning level). The school leadership ensures that the ENL teachers will have results of the NYSESLAT test by printing out the NYSESLAT results from ATS (the RLAT report) and giving it to the ENL teacher in the beginning of the school year (in September right after Labor Day during the Professional Development Teacher meetings before the students come in). This will ensure the ENL teacher has all the data and can begin to prepare the entitlement, and non-entitlement letters. We also also look at state test results (ELA and Math State tests) to see if the ELLs are progressing. The school leadership prints out for all the teachers the Item Skills Analysis of the NYS ELA and Math State tests, so that all the teachers can concentrate on reviewing student work and adjusting the curriculum based on theses results including any learning and instructional gaps that were revealed. The ENL teacher also confers with the ELL classroom teachers to see how they are progressing in the classroom. We also use the Go Math assessments, Journeys writing assessments, Teacher's College, Fountas and Pinnell. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 4. After the summative data has been gathered, we will make sure that any student who needs additional assistance in their academic progress will get the necessary interventions such as AIS, speech, after-school programs, RAZ Kids, Foundations, Orton-Gillingham program. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 5. Based on our data, we will pinpoint our individual ELLs academic needs and provide instruction in accordance to the RTI framework. We will provide rigorous and evidence based curriculum and English language development supports in the Tier I instructional model in both the regular classroom and the ESL program. If we see some students struggling, we will provide them with Tier II instructional supports such as , extra attention and more diffentiated activities to help and guide them so thate they can get the most support in their academic studies. If a student still needs additional support after the Tier I and Tier II instructuional supports have been implemented those students will be targeted as receiving Tier III insructional supports, which include intensive and individualalized instruction (small group or 1:1 support). The support services provided must be aligned to any intervention plans (e.g., Academic Intervention Services) the school is already providing to all students. There are RTI resources for ELL educators on the DELLSS’ website. The school leadership ensures that the interventions are being implemented by having each teacher keep a RTI binder that includes extra student work that is given to the student who is need of further assistance. The work from this binder will show the progress of these students in need and will prove if they need any additional interventions which were explained above. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 CEP 49  6. According to the 2016 NYSESLAT results, there was 1 kindergarten student who scored at the expanding level, and two who scored at the transitioning level. There was one 1 st grader who scored at the commanding level, one at the transitioning level, two at the expanding level and one at the emerging level. For the second graders, there were three students at the expanding level, and three students at the commanding level. For the third grade,rth grade, there were three students at the commanding level, one student at the expanding level. For our fourth grade., there was one at the expanding level. For the entering kindergarten students who took the NYSITELL, there were 4 students who scored at the entering level, two students at the transitioning level, and two students at the expanding level. The NYSESLAT results are shared with all the teachers in September. The ENL teacher makes sure she discusses the results with the classroom teachers, so that the classroom teacher can alter his or her instruction to take into account the ELLs in the class so it caters to their needs. These results from the NYSESLAT are downloaded from the RLAT function in ATS. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 7. We will download the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results from the RLAT function in ATS and disseminate the results of the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL to all administration and classroom teachers so that we can evaluate the success or our programs with ELLs. By analyzing the results of the NYSESLAT exam and comparing results of each child from year to year, we will see if the child is progressing to the next level (example: from low intermediate/emerging level to intermediate/transitioning level). We will also look at state test results (ELA and Math State tests) to see if the ELLs are progressing, and confer with the classroom teachers to monitor progress in the classroom. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELL students' instruction is delivered through a combination of integrated and standalone ENL services. The certified ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher in order to plan and implement instruction during scheduled integrated ENL services. For ENL standalone services, students are grouped heterogenously within a two grade span, except for ELL students in special education classes. In order to move towards an organizational model that fulfills the CR Part 154 requirements for English as a New Language, the administration structured this year's class lists so that all of the ELLs on a grade will be placed in the same classroom, to the fullest extent possible. In this way, the ENL teacher is able to service students through integrated ENL services as much as possible . The administration plans to continue to structure future class lists so that all the ELLs on a grade are placed in the same classroom, to the fullest extent possible, in order to ensure that the majority of ELL students can be serviced by following the breakdown of total ENL minutes as per CR Part 154 requirements for ENL services, which are as follows: Levels: Beginning/Entering 360 total minutes of ENL (180 min. standalone ENL and 180min. integrated ENL/ELA). Levels: Low intermediate/ Emerging 360 total minutes of ENL (90 min. standalone ENL and 180min. integrated ENL/ELA. Levels: Intermediate/Transitioning 180 total minutes of ENL (90min integrated ENL/ELA, 90 min. flexibility standalone or integrated ENL). Levels: Advance/Expanding 180 total minutes of ENL (180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area). Proficient/Commanding 90 minutes of ENL (90 min. integrated ENL/ELA or other content area). b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2018-19 CEP 50  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2. There are 5 proficiency levels for ELLs based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. According to CR Part 154 requirements for English as a New Language, grades K-8, the total minutes of ENL instruction are as follows: Entering and Emerging levels need 2 units of study per week (360 minutes); Transitioning and expanding levels need 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes); Commanding level needs .5 units of study per week (90 minutes). Also, former ELLs need .5 units of study per week (90 minutes). The school ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model by first having a full-time certified ENL teacher, Mrs. Coraci, cover the ENL instructional program. All the ELL students will receive their full mandated ENL minutes (standalone and integrated) To make this possible, administration structured this year's class lists so that all of the ELLs on a grade will be placed in the same classroom, to the fullest extent possible. In this way, the ENL teacher is able to create a schedule to service each ELL student. The administration plans to continue to structure future class lists so that all the ELLs on a grade are placed in the same classroom, to the fullest extent possible, in order to ensure that the majority of ELL students can be serviced by the ENL teacher either through standalone and/or integrated models. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 3. The ENL teacher is state certified in ENL instruction by New York State. In addition, she is licensed in Common Branches by New York State. The current instructional program, which is delivered in English, it is designed to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. It includes the use of sheltered instruction in the content areas, TPR, hands-on activities, smart board lessons, manipulatives, pictures, music and movement, frequent access to language learning software and various online educational websites, and employs a broad range of literacy strategies to support the ELL students. In addition, resources that align with Fundations, Journeys Reading Program are utilized to reinforce what the children are learning in class. Classroom teachers collaborate with the ENL teacher to ensure that content presented in the English language is made comprehensible to ELLs through appropriate application of ENL language learning methods and strategies, such as those described above. Additionally, the ENL Teacher collaborates with the AIS teachers and related service providers who service ELLs to ensure that appropriate strategies, methods, and approaches are utilized in the AIS program and during related service sessions. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 4. Students who are Spanish dominant and do not score proficient on the NYSITELL are administered the Spanish LAB. At the present time, PS 32 does not have sufficient numbers in order to sustain a TBE or DL class. However, in the event that the school should open a TBE or DL program, native language assessments such as EL SOL, ELE Spanish Reading Test, or Chinese Reading Test or other formal assessments in the language of instruction in the TBE or DL program other than English will be utilized to appropriately evaluate students in their native language(s). In our current Journeys reading program, there are some assessments available in Spanish which the classroom teachers have used. Specifically our fourth grade teacher, who had a Spanish speaking student from Puerto Rico . She utilizes Spanish assessments that can be found in the Journeys Program and GO Math program. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 51  5a. At this current time, P.S.32 has no SIFE students. In the future, if we should get SIFE students, we would reassess these SIFE students by checking into their NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores and putting them in the correct English proficiency level. They will receive full support services such as after-school programs, reading support through our Journeys program, and any necessary AIS support services. Once a SIFE student is performing at or above the transitioning/intermediate level on the annual English language proficiency assessment, the student’s status as a Student with Inconsistent/Interrupted Formal Education is removed, even though the student may continue to be identified as an English language learner. 5b. Our plan for the ELL newcomers is to first administer the NYSITELL to new entrants into our school, based on the Home Language Survey, so that we can identify the proper English proficiency level:s in: entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, commanding, Then we make sure each ELL student is administered the NYSESLAT every year to place them in the appropriate English proficiency level for the following year. When they score at the commanding level on the NYSESLAT they will still receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction for 2 more years. 5c. For our developing ELL students, teachers will support student reading skills through use of the Journeys Program, Teacher's College and Balanced Literacy models to enhance reading comprehension and inferencing skills. After-school services support the student in various reading areas (main idea, inferencing, reading comprehension, etc.) Also, inclusion in our monthly ELL Parent/Child workshops will further help the student to succeed. 5d. PS 32 does not currently have any Long Term ELL students. In the event that we need to provide service to a long term ELL student, the student would be provided with the required ENL instruction in addition to any other intervention services found necessary. Additional services may include participation in related service(s), inclusion in the Afte-rschool program, parent support workshops or other available support services. Additionally, the ENL teacher, classroom teachers, related service provider(s) and AIS teachers would collaborate to ensure that the academic and language learning needs, as well as other special needs, of all long term ELL are addressed. 5e) Former ELLs will be supported in instruction by receiving integrated ENL services for 90 minutes per week. During the integrated ENL services, the ENL teacher will collaborate with the classroom teacher and come up with strategies that will help the former ELL student succeed in ELA, Math and content subjects. Also, for 2 years after the former ELL students pass the NYSESLAT, (reach the Commanding level), they will get additional time (time and a half) on the ELA exam in the spring. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 6. ELLs who have been identified as having special needs have been placed in accordance with his/her IEP, which indicates specific ENL instruction in addition to any special education services needed. ENL instruction is differentiated in order to meet the special needs of individual students, increase academic achievement, and support language acquisition. Paraprofessionals assigned to Special Education ELLs accompany their students during standalone ENL services. Additionally, the ENL teacher, classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, and AIS teachers collaborate to ensure that the academic and language learning needs of all ELL-SWD students are addressed, as well as other special needs. Additional services to which ELL-SWDs are entitled include participation in an AIS program, inclusion in the after-school tutoring program, parent support workshops or other available support services. Special Education teachers implement the same literacy and content curricula as their General Education counterparts. Daily academic content area instruction in the classroom incorporates the use of research-based academic and language learning strategies that have been found to be successful with ELLs with special needs, as well as manipulatives, visuals, realia, hands-on activities, TPR, and music and movement to facilitate the acquisition of language and content area knowledge. The ENL Teacher and classroom teachers of ELL-SWDs collaborate to ensure that ENL language learning strategies are integrated into each lesson to support student achievement of both academic and linguisitic goals. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP 52  7. PS 32 uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse academic and linguistic needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. All ELL-SWDs are placed in the least restrictive environment according to the requirements indicated on the most current IEP of each child. The ELL-SWDs whose IEPs require an alternate placement paraprofessional are assigned an alternate placement paraprofessional in the classroom. Additionally, alternate placement paraprofessionals accompany the ELL-SWDs to whom they are assigned to standalone ENL services. All Special Education teachers implement the same literacy and content curricula as their General Education counterparts. The ENL Teacher, Special Education teachers, paraprofessionals (including alternate placement paraprofessionals), AIS teachers, and related service provider(s) collaborate to ensure that all ELL-SWDs are able to achieve curricular goals through support provided through ENL teaching methods and learning strategies and other research-based instructional practices that have been proven to be successful in making content comprehensible and further supporting English language acquisition for ELL-SWDs. Scheduling flexibility in the ENL program allows for the ENL Teacher to provide integrated ENL services during content area studies as well as literacy instruction. When appropriate, scheduling flexibility in the ENL program also allows for ELL-SWDs to be mainstreamed into General Education settings during content area and/or literacy instruction. Mainstreaming decisions for individual ELL-SWDs are achieved through collaboration and discussion among the ENL Teacher, Special Education teacher, paraprofessional, AIS teacher, related service provider(s), and administrators so that the most appropriate instruction for the ELL-SWD may be delivered in the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 8. Some of our targeted intervention programs for ELLs (including our ELL newcomers, developing ELL students, former ELLs, and any SIFE students) include: an after-school tutoring program for reading and math. Within their own classrooms their teachers will support these ELLs through the Journeys Reading Program, Balanced-Literacy approach and Go Math Mathematics Program. Also, Speech teachers have been trained in the Orton-Gillingham program. The languages that these interventions are available in is only in English at this time. Parent workshops are also available. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 9. PS 32 will implement a nw program called: Orton-Gillingham. The administration has sent staff members this year (2017) to get training in it. This program has been recently added and will continue in the upcoming school year.. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 10. At the present time our ELL population is sufficient to continue ENL services, therefore, there is no need to discontinue ELL services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 11. All our ELL students are afforded equal access to all school programs. ELLs, especially, are invited to these programs; the parents are sent home letters (translated when needed) to invite their children to partake in these programs. These school programs include: ETAS (Enrichment Through the Arts), after-school tutoring program, band, talent show, monthly ELL Parent and Child Workshops conducted by the ENL teacher, and any kind of fairs that we may have. Translated letters are sent home when needed. The ELLs that do participate at these programs, participate on a full-time basis. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 12. We have been increasing our instructional materials used in the program. We use the "Journeys" Reading Program and we follow the ENL strategies and RTI models that accompany it. We also use components from Rigby’s “On Our Way to English”, big books with small read along books, non-fiction books, listening tapes/cds, picture cards, NYSESLAT preparation material, Time For Kids Writing Kit and Time for Kids reading non-fiction. ELL students will also be able to use bilingual glossaries/dictionaries when needed. Teachers also use Smartboard technology in their classrooms to help students succeed. The ESL teacher also utilizes the Smartboard and the internet in her lessons; ELL students uses various educational websites such as National Geographic to look up information. 2018-19 CEP 53  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 13. We offer native language support to our ELLs by offering translation dictionaries/glossaries for use in class and during the the state ELA and Math testing. Additionally, whenever possible, newcomers are assigned a "buddy" who is fluent in the newcomer's home language and English to assist the newcomer as he or she adjusts to the new school setting. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 14. Required services support and resources correspond to ELLs' age and grade levels by having the teachers who provide academic intervention services to ELLs consult the ENL teacher to ensure that all services and resources are appropriate for each student's individual age, grade levels, and language learning needs. When appropriate, instruction is differentiated and resources are modified to meet the needs of the learners. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 15. PS 32 does not share a building at this time. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 16. In the event that the school is aware of an incoming ELL student prior to the beginning of the school year, opportunities such as including parents in parent workshops, school tour, program review, and access to supplemental materials in English and/or the native language appropriate for the child are made available. Oral and written communication will be provided in the parent's language of choice. The action plan for the upcoming school year will be the same. We will support the incoming ELLs by having the ENL teacher meet with them and interview them as soon as possible to determine ESL eligibility, she will then administer the NYSITELL as soon as she can since early testing is allowed in June. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 17. There are no language electives offered to students at PS 32 at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 18. N/A: PS 32 does not offer a Dual Language Program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional Development is provided for the entire staff (assistant principals, classroom teachers: general and special education, ESL teacher, clusters, speech therapists, occupational therapists, paraprofessionals, guidance counselor, school psychologist, social worker, secretaries and parent coordinators) during professional development sessions on our extended day. The time-line for the professional development program is September through June. Topics for professional development sessions include: differentiated instruction, case study, analyzing data to drive instruction, guided reading, running records, writer's workshop, curriculum planning/mapping, acuity, inquiry team meetings, data review, how to read an 2018-19 CEP 54  IEP, Balanced Literacy, data driven Instruction, design your own assessments in math, data/ELA item skills analysis, the Danielson Evaluation System, "Journeys" Program". These workshops help teachers differentiate instruction for the ELLs. They also explain how the teachers will use the data gathered for all students, ELLs, Special Education, AIS, etc. to instruct the skill their students need to make academic gains. Our school offers professional development on Mondays during the extended professional development period afterschool to teachers of ELLs and all other teachers in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Standards. This professional development includes: analyzing the Danielson Famework, faculty meetings, grade-level meetings, 1 to 1 conferences, workshops for the Journeys Reading Program, intra-visitations to other teacher's classrooms. The ENL teacher, Caroline Coraci, also attends various ELL Professional Development meetings that are offered through The Division of English Language Learners and Student Support. The ESL teacher also attends meetings that train for the LAP (Language Allocation Policy), NYSESLAT administration, (NYSITELL). 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2. As per CR Part 154.2, all staff will receive at minimum 15% of total hours for professional development requirements in ENL specific professional development. The ENL-specific professional develoment for bilingual eductation/ENL teachers will be 50% of the total professional development. This will be achieved through participation in Professional Development sessions with issues related to ELLs, either in-house or provided by organizations such as, the Division of Engish Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS), NYS TESOL, NYSABE. The school will maintain a record of each staff member’s attendance at such workshops. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. Our school provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency results, and language development needs in all content areas. The ENL teacher conducts theses meetings throughout the year. She will meet with individual parents and sponsors a workshop each month for ELL parents and their children on helping their child to succeed. For example, in the spring the ENL teacher will conduct a workshop for parents and their children on explaining the NYSESLAT and what parents and children can do to help prepare for it. We will have translators availbale during these meetings. For example, a Paraprofessional, Omima Abdalla, speaks Arabic, another Paraprofessional, Giovanna Racioppo speaks Spanish and Italian, Marina Treybick, School Psychologist, speaks Russian. If we need other languages translated, we will utilize the Translation and Interpretation Service. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. There is much parent involvement and support here at P.S. 32. We try to fulfill all of parental needs and wishes. The Parent Coordinator, works diligently in organizing various activities/workshops that parents would prefer. She also is always available for any parental concerns such as getting in touch with teachers and administration. She will also make sure a translator is on hand for any translations we may need; we will utilize in-house translators and the Translation and Interpretation Service if needed. She also will hand out parent surveys to see what are parent concerns or what workshops have been beneficial to them. We offer over 60 parent workshops/meetings throughout the year. These activities, workshops and meetings provide information and strategies to help parents support student achievement, understand curriculum, descriptions of services, getting involved with and having fun with their children etc. Workshops and meetings are conducted by supervisors, psychologist, social worker, nurses. The parents also get involved with their children through "Arts Night", "Math Night", 2018-19 CEP 55  "Story Night" Talent show, concerts, etc. Parents of ELL students are invited to all of the various workshops and activities offered at our school especially the workshops that are specifically geared for ELL parents. - Workshops that are specifically planned for ELL parents include: Parent Choice and Parent Curriculum meetings which are scheduled in September within 10 days of student enrollment. Both meetings are run by the certified ESL teacher. The Parent Choice meeting is for parents of new ELL students. Parents will be shown a DOE video explaining the 3 program choices they have (Dual Language, Transitional Bilingual Education Program, and Freestanding ENL Program. Parents will also fill out the Program Selection and Parent Survey forms. The ENL teacher, Caroline Coraci will offer monthly ELL Parent/Child workshops to offer strategies on helping their child succeed, she also sponsors parent workshops in the spring to inform parents of the upcoming NYSESLAT and offer strategies to help their child succeed in taking the NYSESLAT. Translation Services Available: For parents who speak another language and have difficulty in communicating we have translators available in our school who help in the translation: Marina Treybick, Psychologist, speaks Russian; Omima Abdalla, Paraprofessional, speaks Arabic, Giovanna Racioppo, speaks Spanish. We have used the Translation and Interpretation Service whenever we did not have a translator available. We also have a deaf parent in the school and for this parent we have used the Sign Language Interpretation Service for parent-teacher conferences, school meetings, classroom projects. For parents who request written information in a different language we will provide them with materials in their home language. Some brief descriptions of other various parental involvement activities, workshops and meetings are listed below: • Literacy Workshops – Parents are informed of the structure of our literarcy workshop model and Journeys program. Parents are given literature to understand the ways they can help in their child’s education, particularly to the reading and writing process, homework help and routines. • Math Night – Parents and students shared wonderful experiences in math as they rotate through different centers. Parents and their children have an opportunity to play mathematical games and problem solve together. • Concerts – Parents are invited to watch their child(ren) perform on stage. These concerts are but not limited to, 4th and 5th grade band, 2nd and 3rd Grade Recorder, and the Talent Show. • Parent Support Group Meeting - This meeting will be conducted by our School psychologist, Mrs. Treybick and social worker, Ms. DeForte. At this meeting, parents can share/discuss issues they are facing such as: children's emotional and social development. • Arts Night - Monthly we offer an 'Arts Night' where parents and students shared wonderful experiences in art as they rotate through different art centers. Parents and their children have an opportunity to create different art projects using a various art material. • Story Night - Supervisors read aloud stories to children and then provide an activity related to the story. • How to Prepare Your Child For the NYS ELA and NYS Math Test - This workshop is conducted by our Vice Principal, Mrs. Rosenberg. Parents are enlightened as to how to help their child prepare for the New York State Tests. They are given various techniques, skills, and strategies they can work on at home with their children. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 56  2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Nancy Spataro, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 32 The Gifford School School DBN: 31R032 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Nancy Spataro Title Principal Jodi Rosenberg Assistant Principal Michele Mancuso Parent Coordinator Caroline Coraci ENL/Bilingual Teacher Tricia-Hana Byra-parent Parent Kathy Scarpaty/Kindergarten Teacher/Subject Area Carmen Sortino/1 st grade Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Nicole Stentella School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/20/17 6/20/17 6/20/17 6/20/17 6/20/17 6/20/17 6/20/17 6/20/17 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R032 School Name: The Gifford School Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Michele Mancuso Parent Coordinator yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At registration, all parents are administered the Home Language Identification Survey. The parent may select to complete the form in either English or the native language. The ENL teacher and Parent Coordinator are present to explain the purpose of the HLIS to the parent. If necessary, school staff fluent in the parent's native language are available to assist in interpretation, or the DOE Over-the-Phone Interpretation Service may be utilized. In Section 3 of the HLIS, the parent indicates the language(s) that s/he would like to communicate both orally and in writing with school staff. The ENL teacher uses data obtained from Section 3 of the HLIS in order to pre-assess which language(s) will be needed for the current school year. The ENL teacher then updates the record of parent language preferences, which is maintained and continually updated by the ENL teacher throughout the school year. Primary language information is shared with the administration, Pupil Accounting secretary, and Parent Coordinator. Classroom teachers of students whose parents have selected to communicate in another language are notified. The ENL teacher and Parent Coordinator work together to provide translated school notices and forms, as well as arranging for any interpretation services that may be required at face-to-face meetings such as 2018-19 CEP 60  Parent Teacher Conferences and IEP meetings. Learning Environment surveys in various languages other than English are made available to parents and guardians. In addition, the ENL Teacher evaluates the needs and interests of ELL families through the use of surveys to obtain feedback from the parents on resources and services offered. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Cantonese English English English Chinese-dialect Chinese-dialect English Italian Mandarin Polish Russian Spanish Turkish Urdu Uzbek English Italian English English English Spanish English English English .32% 1.1% .5% .16% 91.4% .32% 1.1% .32% 1.93 1.4% .16% .48% .16% English Arabic English Chinese-dialect English Italian English English English Spanish English English English .32% 1.1% .5% .16% 91.4% .32% 1.1% .32% 1.93% 1.4% .16 .48% .16% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families PT Conference announcements Sept./Nov./March/May How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation and translation vendor for non-covered languages. 2018-19 CEP 61  ELL's Entitlement/ Sept. We use DOE Intranet template(s) non-entitlement/continuation letters Parent Curriculum Conference Sept. New York State testing dates March/April/May Letters from school leadership Throughout the year Afterschool program information Throughout the year We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation and translation vendor for non-covered languages. We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation and translation vendor for non-covered languages. We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation and translation vendor for non-covered languages. We use bi-lingual staff, DOE T&I Unit for translation and translation vendor for non-covered languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to PT Conferences Sept./Nov./March/May PT Curriculum nights Sept. PT individual conferences Throughout the year IEP meetings Throughout the year provide interpretation service(s)? We use bi-lingual staff and/or DOE T&I Unit for Translation We use bi-lingual staff and/or DOE T&I Unit for Translation We use bi-lingual staff and/or DOE T&I Unit for Translation We use bi-lingual staff and/or DOE T&I Unit for Translation 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, we will reach all parents including limited-English proficient families through: ROBO call. This is a special phone call that goes out to alert all parents in their native languages. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The school administration will ensure staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 through various staff meetings and PDs. They will inform them of the resources available such as bi-lingual staff and also give them the information to contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, each parent/guardian who is in need of language assistance will receive a copy of the DOE's Bill of Parent's Rights and Responsibilities in the primary language, including information regarding the parental right to translation and interpretation services. Signs indicating the availability of translation and interpretation services will be prominently displayed in the Main Office. In addition, the school's safety plan will include procedures for ensuring that parents will not be prevented from communicating with school staff solely due to a language barrier. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use parent surveys to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. We have implemented the feedback to improve he language services by making sure that all parents receive the proper language services. If we can't address all the languages, we will utilize the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for assistance. 2018-19 CEP 63 
