2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75R037 School Name: P.S. R037 Principal: DEBORAH EVANS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Public School 37R 307500015037 Pre-K - 12 School Number (DBN): 75R037 15 Fairfield Street, Staten Island, NY 10308 718-984-9800 Phone Number: 718-356-8712 Fax: Deborah Evans Devans@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Deborah Evans Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Lorraine Ferrannini Annmarie Donato & Susan Pugliese Deborah Evans N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ketler Louissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue New York, New York 10010 klouissaint@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 802-1500 Phone Number: (212) 802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Staten Island Marie Callaghan FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 400 First Avenue NY, NY Mcallaghan4@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1604 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Deborah Evans Lorraine Ferrannini Annmarie Donato Kim Welle Cathy Mione *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Diana Borgese Marie Farrell Nancy Dischiavi Maria Palazzola Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P37R Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview To foster independent learning for all students by recognizing and celebrating their differences. We are dedicated to meeting the needs of our students and families by providing students every opportunity to maximize their potential by developing skills necessary for independence. The school strives to achieve this by providing a nurturing, structured language based environment. We integrate the Common Core Leaning Standards, technology, the arts, 2018-19 CEP 9  community based internships and related services. We have created a learning environment that promotes positive behavior support systems. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Upon entry to the school we encourage parents and guardians to participate in all aspects of the school. Our main site is located in the Great Kills section of Staten Island and houses students in Pre K through the fifth grade with a variety of disabilities, specifically students with autism and intellectual disabilities. Our middle school, located with IS2, houses student grades 6-8. Our high school site (Great Kills High School) house students with autism. We have partnered with three schools on Staten Island (PS 4, PS 30, and Petrides ) to meet the needs of students that benefit from a less restrictive setting. Our school has 381 students in grade Pre K though the age of 21. The school’s population is comprised of 15% African American, 30% Hispanic, 46% Caucasian and 5% Asian. The student body consists of 5% English Language Learners and 100% Special Education. Boys account for 73% of the students’ and the girls account for 27%. The average attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 88.1%. Students at our High School Site attend many vocational worksites within the Staten Island community to build and develop skills necessary for post-secondary outcomes placement. The community agencies and businesses provide work-study opportunities for the students. Our school’s agency and business affiliations include: Applebee locations, local pizzerias, St. Clares, Community Resources, Gericke Farm, Fastbreak Basketball, Senator Lanza’s office, Hillside Pool Club, SI Companion Dog Training Club, College of Staten Island, Nucci South, Adaptive Design, King Fisher Park, Family Fruit, Pier 76 Restaurant, and Lifestyles. P37R’s Great Kills High School has a Family Worker who provides assistance with eligibility, through the Office for People with Developmental Disabilities (OPWDD). She assists with getting Medicaid service coordination (MSC) at an agency of the family’s choice. Our Family Worker is instrumental in helping our families with psychological and social referrals for evaluation. She also assists parents with 17A guardianship in conjunction with the Staten Island Surrogate Court. Agencies are invited to the school to provide parent workshops, or host parent workshops at other local agencies and/or District 75 schools. The agencies are as follows: Richmond County Surrogate Court, The Office of People with Developmental Disabilities, Lifestyles, On Your Mark, Eden II, Heartshare, A Very Special Place, SI Developmental Disabilities Service Organization, AHRC, Highbridge, PCCS, Margaret Ultra Home Care, NY Start, Elizabeth Puch Center, IBR-The Jervis Clinic, Parent to Parents NYS, UAU, UCP/Core Hoffman Center, and Seaman's Society. Parents are encouraged to be an integral part of the transition process, assisting with the development of vocational assessments. The transitional process for graduates starts 2 years prior to graduation, when parents are encouraged to attend our transitional fall and spring workshops. Our transition coordinator, who also works with the Family Worker, sets up the fall and spring workshops. The transition coordinator works with parents to set up the agency visit for their child prior to graduation. Students have the opportunity to receive a monetary reward for participating in our vocational training program through D75 and UAU. One year prior to graduation, parents visit various agencies they are considering for placement. The graduating students have the opportunity to visit the agency that is being considered. We have developed several community partnerships at P37. Marquis Studios has been involved in a partnership with P 37 for 15 years. Residencies have encompassed visual arts, movement, music and circus arts. This past year was the unveiling of the “Drawing on the Walls” project. Canvases were created by P 37 students who worked with Marquis Studios artists. 2018-19 CEP 10  AHRC is a leader in providing services to individuals who have developmental disabilities and has dedicated resources for students at Great Kills High School after school program. Adaptive Design Association designs and builds customized furniture made from cardboard for students with disabilities. The Adaptive Design Association has partnered with P37 to assist individuals with disabilities learn and develop skills while in school and to help with a smoother transition into adulthood and employment. P 37 will continue to utilize the space provided by IS2 where we build Adaptive Design products. IS2 students will also partner with the Adaptive Design Association. Boy Scouts has played a vital role with P37 for the past 12 years. P37 boyscouts, Troop 15, involves about 60 boy scouts. This troop meets on a monthly basis and is involved in structured activities, which help students understand how to be better citizens and how to contribute to the community in meaningful ways. Girl Scouts has been an integral part of P 37 for the past 15 years. P37 was the founding troop for special needs students. Presently, Troop 5312 consists of 50 girl scouts and is a sister troop to Troop 5227. The United States Marines have been collaborating with P 37 for the past 8 years. There are annual socials, fundraisers and holiday events. Once a year, the marines outfit a few of our multiple handicapped students with adapted trikes. Staff, students and their families are invited to their headquarters for this occasion. The Rotary Club has partnered P 37 for the past 10 years. The Rotary Club donates to families in need. They provide food baskets and turkeys for Thanksgiving. They provide a monetary donation to be used for holiday gifts for all students. The Kiwanis Club has partnered with the Boy Scouts of America and P37. The Kiwanis Club created a camping day at P 37 with indoor activities that allowed our students to explore the great outdoors. Dog Therapy Program has been an inclusive part of P37 extracurricular activities for the past 10 years. The engaging activities include petting, brushing, giving simple commands and walking the dog on a leash. Students have benefited from this bi-monthly program affecting sensory input, socialization and communication opportunities. Students learn responsibility and caretaking skills. This program increases self-pride in students. P37 is a field site supporting student teachers from CSI and Touro College to learn instructional strategies to best serve the needs of students within District 75. PS 4, PS 30, and the Petrides School of District 31 have partnered with P37 to move our students eligible for inclusion to a least restrictive environment. C.H.A.M.P.S. Program – an afternoon physical education program is available to our student on-site after school. District 75 Special Olympics Programs – this program introduces our children to the word of Special Olympics and more formalized interactive sports. Teaching Artist Training Institute (TATI) – this program provides free training and arts education best practices for individuals interested in working with students with special needs. The residents come to P 37R as a site to provide this valuable training. A SEP Grant will allow GKHS to partner with the Mouse Create, which will give students the opportunity to work at rudimentary programming and software development. 2018-19 CEP 11  P37 is a para training site for South Richmond High School Students. Following a rigorous morning of meeting academic requirements, the HS students are paired with P 37 teachers and assist in their classrooms. The HS students are receiving hands-on training and teachers are modeling effective paraprofessional strategies. We continue to celebrate (3.4) High Expectations for all students. Our administrative staff consistently implements highly effective strategies for communicating high expectations and are focused on feedback to students and families with reference to college and career readiness (Strong Family Community Ties) Additional findings in Indicator 4.2 (Teacher teams and leadership development) concluded that the vast majority of teachers consistently participate in collaborative inquiry based professional teams. Embedded leadership structures encourage teacher’s opinions in key decisions from planning curricula to improving instructional practices (Collaborative Teachers and Trust). Last year's findings from Indicator 1.2 (Pedagogy) have lead to 2018-2019's continued focus on the Danielson Framework component 3B (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques). Emphasis will be placed on the following areas of instruction: Identifying CCLS addressed during lesson. Flow of the lesson. "To-with- by" learning model.   A continued focus a specific learning targets.    Hess Matrix/higher-order thinking questions.    Embedded core vocabulary.  Use of visuals, devices, and technology.  Have students take ownership of what they are learning through self-assessments. Learning Target is aligned to the tasks or NYSAA extensions. Lessons should be differentiated with multiple entry points – access for all learners. This past year’s instructional focus to provide students the opportunity to develop the skills to become independent readers through consistency and repetition overtime utilizing core vocabulary which leads to desired outcomes. As a school community we focused on becoming a Universal Design for Learning school. We narrowed our focus to “student engagement” (Danielson Framework component, 3c, Student Engagement). During the 2018-2019 school year we will expand our transition to becoming a UDL school by increasing the number of stakeholders that are participating in this program and increasing the use of the UDL principles. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The programs are designed for students to become "expert learners" Access for all students and their learning styles are areas of focus for all students. Our goals include having students becoming effective communicators and being able to generalize skills across all environments. We focus on academic, social and daily life skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Assessments indicate progress in ELA and Math scores. We will continue to provide rigorous instruction as a result of the Learning Partners Program with an emphasis on writing strategies. Collaborative Teams are an integral part of the school culture and will continue to be so next year. Expansion of intervisitation through the LPP. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75R037 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 389 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 76.9% % Reduced Lunch 6.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 31.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 45.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 0.0% 0.5% 100.0% 15.2% 5.4% 2.8% 6 3% 7.5 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P37 inquiry teams continued to collaborate with grade band of teachers to determine instructional supports needed to align instruction to the CCLS, particularly in the middle school and High School. Teams of teachers attended various vendor fairs and met with vendors to determine appropriate curriculum to meet the needs of the students. Attainment Curricula in ELA and Math were purchased for grades 6-12. This curricula have provided multiple pathways of learning through provided age appropriate subject matter, software, and manipulatives for math. In 2018-2019 we will be expanding our curriculum to include Attainment ELA K-5. As we began to assess the 6:1:1 Kindergartens entering the school utilizing SANDI, it was apparent that we need to purchase a phonic program that would be compliment the District 75 Framework. We purchased SMILE and Fountas and Pinnell and invited a literacy coach to provide professional development to the teachers. Analysis of the SANDI assessments at the end of the school year indicated that overall progress was noted between fall and spring as follows: Reading improved by 5%, math by 5% and writing by 5%. We attribute some of the progress towards purchasing the curriculum. We plan on building coherence by ordering ELA Attainment for grades K-5. We will expand SMILE and Fountas and Pinnell to include our first and second grade classes. Analysis of SANDI Assessments in Writing, found that students were not making as much progress in writing as they were in reading and math. In the 2017-2018 school year we will expand the writing curricula “First Author” to our 6:1:1 classes. During the 2016-2017 school year, P37 was accepted into the Learning Partners Program and will continue to collaborate with P 25 and P373 with an emphasis on story writing strategies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 14  By June 2019, students will demonstrate a 2% increase in the areas of ELA (Reading for Information,Writing )and Math (Operations and Algebra) common core standards with implementation of targeted instructional strategies as measured by Fall/Spring SANDI and FAST assessment results. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will administer SANDI Assessments to all students in ELA, math and writing. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? October 2018 Administration Teachers Related Service Teachers will analyze assessments and flag IEP goals aligned to the SANDI. Teachers November Administration Teachers will create SANDI plans with PLC, review strategies and differentiated instruction. Assessment Accountability coach will be utlized to support staff in collecting and analysis of data. PDs and coaching will be utilized to support rigorous instruction via implementation of the Hess Matrix across curricula. Ongoing data review and analysis of student work products during teacher team meetings. Our partnership with P25 and P373 through the Learning Partners Program will improve student outcomes by expanding upon teaching instructional strategies. Related Service 2018 Teachers ongoing Administration Related Service Teachers monthly Administration Related Service 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Information will be presented to parents throughout the school year. In October, a parent-teacher Meet & Greet is scheduled so that parents can get acquainted with teachers. In November and March of the 2018-2019 school year, Parent-Teacher conferences are scheduled. IEP Progress Monitoring, including parental meetings and input, takes place in November, February, June, and August. Cluster teachers communicate with parents through quarterly newsletters to parents, and are available to meet with parents during Parent-Teacher conferences. Assistant Principals will be responsible for both the implementation and oversight of familial support measures. IEP mandates that we provide parent trainings that include family engagement with regard to literacy programs in school. Speech teachers provide training for parents on communicative strategies to be used at home to assist with generalizing literacy skills at home. PTA meetings (day and night) is a forum where we will involve parents in 2018-19 CEP 16  understanding curriculum presented in schools - parent coordinator and lead teachers will provide the information with monthly agendas as to curriculum in school and supported parents with understanding of CCLS. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development Professional Learning Communities SMART Plans related to SANDI Teacher coverages for PD Teacher prep period coverages Teacher per session for parent workshops Administrative support in lesson planning and preparation Parent training to support academic rigor across the environments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. September 2018-June 2019: Assessments will assist with teacher preparation and planning of lessons. September 2018-June 2019: Professional Development will support teacher instruction. September 2018-June 2019: Low inference evidence will be used to make adjustments in instruction. September 2018-June 2019: Build capacity and support staff with instructional dialogue. 2018-19 CEP 17  November 2018: SANDI assessment will be completed online in the fall. December 2018: Teacher will identify IEP goal aligned to assessments. February 2019: SMART goals will be developed based upon the fall benchmarks for SANDI skills. Benchmark averages for fall of 2018: RI.1 (Level 1): RI.1 (Level 2): RI.1 (Level 3): OA.1 (Level 1): OA.1 (Level 2): OA.1 (Level 3): By the end of February, teachers will have met during weekly professional learning community cohort meeting, to share SANDI data and prepare for FAST interim assessments and strategies towards effective instructional practices that will impact student progress. May 2019: Teachers will administer the FAST (final assessments). June 2019: SANDI spring assessments will be completed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) SANDI/FAST - Reading for Information and Operations and Algebra Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We realize the importance of providing a culture of safety where students are challenged and supported by their teachers and peers. Student engagement is one of the critical features to ensure student learning in a safe and supportive environment. The Danielson Framework for Teachers indicates Engaging Students in Learning is the “centerpiece of the Framework for Teaching.” The framework guides us in ensuring the students are “challenged to be ‘minds-on’.” As a school we will continue to focus on student engagement for the 2018-2019 year within the model of Universal Design for Learning. The principles of UDL include removing barriers from our teaching methods and curriculum materials to ensure all students have access to learning. Within this framework, UDL seeks to provide multiple ways to engage students’ interest and motivation to ensure students are engaged and motivated to learn. During the 2018-2019 school year, every staff member will attend school-wide UDL trainings. A UDL task force was formed and, as of 2017-2018, consisted of two classroom teachers, a paraprofessional, a speech-language teacher, an occupational therapist, a physical therapist and an assistant principal. The task force was expanded during the 2017-2018 school year to include addition classroom teachers, therapists, and an additional administrator. This team attended district-wide trainings throughout the year and collaborated to determine a school-wide focus for the P37 transition to a UDL school environment. The principles of UDL includes three basic tenets: multiple means of representation, expression, and engagement. We assessed student engagement utilizing the Danielson Framework for teaching, Measure of Teacher Practice, component 3C: Engaging Students in Learning. Based on Advance for the 2017-2018 school year, 10% of our teaching staff scored in the Developing range in this area, 65% Effective and 21% Highly Effective. Review of GRTL data from the 2017-2018 school year indicated that our students improved in the area of Time on Task from a rubric score of 1.7 to 2.7 over from week 1 to week 29. In addition student scores improved from 1.7 to 2.7 in the area of Attention from week 1 to 29. This data showed an ascending trend in the areas of attention and time on task when GRTL was implemented in the classroom environment. Researchers Sheldon and Biddle, 1998, found that engagement promotes higher quality of learning. It is our belief, GRTL impacts student learning in the areas of attention and time on task. This in turn will prepare our students to be active learners ready for the rigorous instruction provided. P37 utilizes a rigorous, standards based curriculum which is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). In addition our teachers have collaborated and developed a curriculum map to meet the needs of every learner. Our teachers and related service providers assess students utilizing SANDI, FAST, NYSAA, ABLLS-R and GRTL programs. These assessments are utilized to measure student learning, formulate goals and drive instruction. In addition, 2018-19 CEP 19  teachers use this information to narrow the focus of instruction to a student friendly, measurable teaching point. This helps to ensure our students are engaged and aware of what the learning task is. This has a direct impact on student assessment. All of our teachers have been trained on how to write measurable, effective learning targets. A variety of resources are utilized to ensure all of our students have access to learning in all environments. Parent trainings are offered on a monthly basis to support generalization of targeted skills into the home and community environments. Parents are encouraged to meet with classroom teachers and related service providers to learn strategies that are being implemented and successfully utilized. In addition, we utilize positive behavior intervention supports such as the use of a Pupil Personnel team consisting of teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, students, parents, administration and a school psychologist. The purpose of this team is to collect and assess behavioral data and plan behavioral supports. In addition, we instituted the PBIS Support Team. Given the importance of student engagement and the central role it plays in student achievement, we recognize the need to continuously strive to improve in this area. We continue to need to work on strategies to foster student engagement to improve students’ outcomes and ensure learning for our diverse group of learners. We seek to provide on-going professional development in this area. Therefore, we will continue to provide training on GRTL to all new teachers and offer training to strengthen all teachers in the use of this program. Administration will support staff by setting up an allocated time period in which GRTL will be completed and ensure it is followed with a lesson driven by the CCLS providing rigorous tasks aligned to the curriculum. A new group of staff members will be selected to form an additional UDL task force. Staff members are volunteering to participate in this task force for the 2018-2019 school year. This new team will attend district-wide trainings and turnkey information to all staff members, providing support and modeling of the strategies implemented. Classroom observations will be utilized to provide supportive feedback with clear expectations and strategies to support classroom teachers in the area of Engaging Students in Learning. The training and support provided will have a direct correlation to improved student engagement which will ensure an increase in student performance and achievement. It is our belief that rigorous instruction and consistent use of research-based strategies to create an environment of learning will directly correlate to movement of students to a least restrictive environment. P37R advocates for students to be in their Least Restrictive Environment (LRE) as outlined by the IDEA. The basis of LRE is to maximize potential while incorporating students in an environment that allows them the opportunity to be involved in the greatest extent possible in an environment that is most conducive to their learning needs and provides rigorous academic opportunities. Through the use of GRTL and UDL strategies, we will ensure learning for our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will establish a supportive environment for learning as demonstrated by a 5% increase in student on-task behavior to ensure that students are ready for challenging instruction based on Get Ready to Learn data. 2018-19 CEP 20  By mid-year of 2018-2019, students have demonstrated by a 20% increase in student on-task behaviors, as shown by improvement in the areas of Self-Regulation, Attention, Performance, and Communication in the Get Ready to Learn program. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff will be informed of school policies and procedures. Professional conversations (Initial Planning Conferences) will be done and utilized to share school-wide expectations, initiative and vision for the school year. First observations will be completed with meaningful, specific feedback and next steps discussed with a focus on student engagement. Teachers, Paraprofessionals By October 2018 Administration Staff members will attend GRTL professional development opportunities, develop a time frame for implementation of this program and will collect data on the GRTL program throughout the school year. Staff will receive professional development opportunities throughout the school year with a focus on student engagement via implementation of strategies aligned with UDL – multiple means of engagement. Teachers, Paraprofessionals Teachers, related service providers, staff members Administrative cabinet with extended cabinet to include lead teachers and UDL task force will evaluate the effectiveness of strategies implemented, review GRTL data and plan further action needed. Teachers Administration Administration Administration September 2018 through June 2019 Monthly October 2018 through June 2019 January 2019- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly progress monitoring of the Get Ready to Learn program will be shared, on a monthly basis, with parents. Lauren Oellerich, an assistant principal in our organization, will implement and oversee this component of family engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 22  Get Ready to Learn - funded by tax levy money ADVANCE Training for all teachers IPC’s Summative end of year conferences UDL Task Force professional development at district office throughout the year Teacher prep period coverages Teacher per session to provide trainings for parents in evening Substitutes for coverages due to professional development, trainings Observation cycles coupled with administrative feedback and next steps Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Staff will receive training on the 2018-2019 P37R policies and procedures by September 2018. 2. Teachers will meet with administration for Initial Planning Conferences to discuss school-wide expectations and set professional goals for the year by October 2018. 3. Initial observation will be completed both formal and informal with a follow-up conversation with administrator to discuss observation, best practice and reflect on lesson. Strategies will be shared and discussed. This will occur by October 2018. 4. Staff members will attend GRTL professional development opportunities and implement the program within their classroom environment by November 2018. 5. Implementation of GRTL will occur at a specified time in each classroom prior to an instructional period and will be monitored to ensure efficacy of program on an on-going basis from November 2018 through June 2019. 6.Staff member will collect data and the GRTL program on a weekly basis and record data for further analysis by December 2018, benchmark of February 2019 and will do so on an on-going basis through June 2019. The benchmark for the Attending component of GRTL for the fall of 2018 was a 1.7 out of 4 on Week 1 of the program. By February of 2018, the GRTL average for Attending had improved to 2.7 out of 4, showing a 25% overall improvement in the Attending component of GRTL. 2018-19 CEP 23  By mid-year of 2018-2019, students have demonstrated by a 20% increase in student on-task behaviors, as shown by improvement in the areas of Self-Regulation, Attention, Performance, and Communication in the Get Ready to Learn program. 7. Staff will attend training focused on student engagement aligned with the school's UDL vision presented by the P37R UDL task force throughout the year through June 2019. 8. Administrative cabinet along with the extended cabinet (lead teachers) will evaluate the effectiveness of strategies implemented by reviewing GRTL data and set up an action plan for further development of engagement in January 2019 and June 2019 data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Get Ready to Learn Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the comprehensive assessment of the P37R’s academic programs, Professional Learning Communities have shown to improve effective instruction and increase student achievements. Our study has shown that improving teachers’ practice and student outcomes was in part achieved by implementation of the Professional Learning Community Model fostering professional collaboration. Key aspects of this research show that strong leadership, high quality professional development and the growth of a collaborative culture will increase student outcomes. As stated on the National Center for Universal Design for Learning Website - (http://www.udlcenter.org/aboutudl/udlguidelines/principle1 ), “Learners differ in the ways that they perceive and comprehend information that is presented to them. In short, there is not one means of representation that will be optimal for all learners; providing options for representation is essential.” The shift from the focus on teaching to a focus on the student learning has profound implications for our school community, faculty/support staff and students. Professional development focusing on flexible approaches that are customized and adjusted for individual needs are necessary as student-centered instructional goals, materials, and assessments are created to improved access to information.  As per the '15-'16 Quality Review Report, P37R received a rating of Well-developed in the area of 4.2 but a rating of Proficient in the area of 1.2. The impact of area 1.2 explained that “Across classroom, teaching practices consistently support students to produce cognitively appropriate work products by engaging students in challenging tasks. In many lessons there are some missed opportunities for students to take ownership of their learning.”  Our '17-'18 SANDI results indicated that the smallest amount of growth was in the area of Writing (1% school-wide).  During the 17-18 school year we expanded the teacher teams across class ratios.  The '17-'18 Advance rating system (MOTP) for P37R shows that our mid-year teacher performance was 9% Developing, 76% Effective, and 13% Highly Effective. By June the average MOTP ratings were: 4% Developing, 85% Effective, and 10% Highly Effective. Teacher performance has been trending towards Highly Effective over the course of the 2017-2018 school year.  As of February of 2019, teacher effectiveness (MOTP) benchmark ratings will be entered and compared to June ratings for spring of 2019. P37R’s instructional focus is concentrated on improving student engagement. In an effort to align the school with this focus, we have established 15 collaborative Professional Learning Communities throughout the main and off sites that are grouped homogeneously by grade, class ratio and/or department (cluster positions). PLC’s meet twice a week to discuss curriculum, lesson planning, intervention strategies, IEP goals, positive behavior supports and analyzing student work (SANDI/FAST SMART Goals). The impact of this collaboration has increased academic rigor within the curriculum, connected to the CCLS and teacher’s planning/preparation. 2018-19 CEP 25  A Universal Design for Learning Task Force was set up at P37R in effort to develop a sense of unity/identity at the Main / JHS / High School and share best practices to impact student learning in line with the 3 principles of UDL – multiple means of representation, multiple means of action and expression and multiple means of engagement. The task force met with the all faculty, related service and support staff during monthly professional learning communities throughout the school to share strategies and provide resources to enhance instruction and increase student engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Teachers and Support Staff will participate in professional development opportunities emphasizing student engagement as demonstrated by a 5% growth with movement from developing to effective range in ratings in the Engaging Learning (3c) section of the Danielson Framework for Teaching, as compared to the 2017-2018 ratings. By mid-year of the 2018-2019 school year, 5.13% of teachers moved from Developing to either Effective of Highly Effective for Component 3C by mid-year, while 6.67% more teachers had a rating of Highly Effective by mid-year. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will schedule common planning time for Professional Learning Communities (PLC) to meet based on one or more of the following areas: grade, class ratio, content area of teaching staff (department) and cluster teachers connected to specific classes. Administration will identify and pair certified school-based mentors to new staff in an effort to facilitate monthly conferences in support of topics pertaining to the development of one’s teaching craft. If there is a need, additional one to one support will be offered to novice teachers. The school will provide continued professional development opportunities in the areas of UDL, curriculum training and data driven instruction to promote a common language and share researched strategies with all teachers and support staff to increase academic rigor/student achievements. During Initial Planning Conferences, new teachers (including teachers new to the school) will work with administration to create individualized growth plans including scheduling professional developments through the District 75 PD website to support teacher’s professional growth. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration, Teachers, PLCs Administration, Teachers Students PLCs will meet twice a week during their assigned common planning time. Administration, School-Based Mentors, Novice Teachers in need Weekly, as needed Administration, School-Based Mentors Administration, Ongoing, Paraprofessionals Teachers, Students Administration, Teachers School designated Professional development days Ongoing Administration, Teachers, Paraprofessionals Administration, Teachers, District 75 Coaches How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 27  Information will be presented to parents throughout the school year. In October, a parent-teacher Meet & Greet is scheduled so that parents can get acquainted with teachers. In November and March of the 2018-2019 school year, Parent-Teacher conferences are scheduled. Quarterly IEP reports take place in November, February, June, and August. Related service providers will offer parent workshops in fall of 2018 and spring of 2019 so that they can better support students at home. Assistant Principals will be responsible for both the implementation and oversight of familial support measures. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SANDI Assessment - funded by Central Office Attainment and Unique Curricula - funded with NYS ALT ASSES CURR CW money Get Ready to Learn - funded with Tax Levy money Parent Involvement - Parent Coordinator Funds Teacher per session/per diem - funded with Tax Levy money Books, hardware, software - NYSTL funds Marquis Studios Art Grant Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -Administration will formulate PLC’s based on one of the following criteria: ● homogeneous classroom ratios ● Grade ● Subject area and designate groups by September 2018. -Administration will supervisor first PLC meetings and distributes the Atlas Protocol during September 2018. -Administration will review PLC sign in sheets notes and next steps completed within PLC Meetings to ensure their effectiveness by October 2018. -Administration will assess and develop a professional development plan for paraprofessionals by October 2018. 2018-19 CEP 28  -Administration will monitor the online school based mentoring system to note staff interactions by December 2018. -Administration will find evidence during formal classroom observations that PLC teams effectively implementing develop strategies and instruction to raise student success by December 2018. This will be evident in lesson planning and instruction. All teachers will show evidence of implementing at least one new strategy to ensure student learning. -Administration will oversee the PLC team during the inquiry process by benchmark February 2019 to determine PLC growth from September to February. -Administration will monitor staff sign-up for professional development workshops through www.district75pd. org website by January 2019. -Administration will have completed the mid-point observations by February 2019. Observations should show a 2% improvement in developing to effective teachers' Danielson ratings for the Planning and Preparation (section 1E) and Instruction (section 3 C) components from February through June of 2019: By mid-year of the 2018-2019 school year, 5.13% of teachers moved from Developing to either Effective of Highly Effective for Component 3C by mid-year, while 6.67% more teachers had a rating of Highly Effective by mid-year. -Administration will have shared feedback of observations ongoing through June 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance System / NYC DOE Framework Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to ensure students are provided instruction in the least restrictive environment and promote independence, strategic reduction and/or termination of related services needs to be considered. As students develop skills necessary to participate in academics, transitional activities, activities of daily living and vocational programs they will become greater prepared to be independent young adults. During the 2017-2018 school year, 9% of students moved to a less restrictive environment in their related service mandates. This includes decrease in frequency of sessions and movement of students to groups or larger group sizes. This progressive movement to LRE reflects our core belief that providing support to the staff through professional learning communities and professional development opportunities will equipped them with the strategies to support student learning, increase use of strategies, and foster greater student independence. As a school embracing the Universal Design for Learning philosophy, we believe all stakeholders need to work collaboratively to ensure learning for all students. Learning is compromised if information is not available to the student or information is presented in ways that requires significant effort to retrieve and process. To reduce barriers to learning, it is important to ensure that information is differentiated and the environment supports student engagement. To do so, collaboration amongst all stakeholders must occur to ensure students are physically and mentally ready for learning. We know the value of providing our students with environmental supports, differentiated materials and resources and communication tools necessary for them to access the content presented. We have provided our staff including teachers, related service, counselors and paraprofessionals with opportunities to attend professional development. This includes attending UDL 101, Teaching Core Words/Concept to Build a Foundation, and UDL - Is Your Classroom as Dynamic as the Rest of the World. In addition, we have provided in house UDL trainings on the concepts targeted including use of core words. Our belief is the use of these strategies will provide our learners with the tools to be more successful in the classroom; therefore increasing academic skills, communication skills and independence. Professional learning communities focus on stakeholders engaging in collegial conversations about the ongoing exploration of three crucial questions that drive the work of these collaborative meetings: What do we want our students to learn? How will we know when each student has learned it? and How will we respond when a student has difficulty learning? To answer these questions we must use data to make meaningful decisions. Data-driven decision making ensure learning. Teachers currently meet twice weekly to review data and student work products and share strategies and resources. In addition, they create SMART plans for a common goal based on assessment of each learner. This enables an ongoing analysis and strategic planning of techniques to within a six week cycle. Stakeholders are grouped by grade band within these communities. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 related service providers will collaborate with classroom teachers to support student learning in the classroom to ensure movement of students to Least Restrictive Environment as evidenced by an overall 5% movement to LRE in related service mandates. Changes to IEPs are logged throughout the year and, as of February, 41 out of 365 enrolled students with related service mandates have seen a reduction in, or termination of, one or more of those services. That represents an 11.2% movement to a less restrictive environment. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Related service providers will provide collaborative service delivery model as appropriate. This model will ensure generalization of language strategies and foster greater independence. RSP, Teachers, students Ongoing RSP, Teachers, admin Common planning time for PLC will be organized to reflect varied class ratios utilizing an agenda to organize content and strategically plan. Strategies will be embedded into lessons and evident in future lessons to ensure student learning. Admin, teachers, RSP, students Twice weekly PLC Admin, teachers, RCP Intervisitations that are teacher-facilitated and focus on the collaborative development of teachers’ instructional knowledge and skills. Intervisitation cycles will be utilized to provide opportunities for groups of teachers and/or individual teachers to learn from their colleagues craft knowledge and support each other through reflection on practice. Ongoing Admin, teachers, students Teachers, Admin, Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Not applicable. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources include scheduling funds for substitute teachers that allow teachers to participate in professional development and intervisitation opportunities. Revised schedules will allow for intervisitation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 32  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be an increase in LRE movement as evidenced by 2% movement in modification of Related Services. Changes to IEPs are logged throughout the year and, as of February, 41 out of 365 enrolled students with related service mandates have seen a reduction in, or termination of, one or more of those services. That represents an 11.2% movement to a less restrictive environment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SESIS/ P37R LRE logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P37R Great Kills High School recognizes that transitioning from a District 75 school is a critical stage in our students' lives that requires strategic planning and individualized goal setting to promote independence within the community/workplace. GKHS currently partners with 24 worksites within the community and scaffolds our alternate vocational training program based on student's ages 14-15 years old students participate in vocational training 1xper week;15-17 years old students participate in vocational training 3x per week and 18-21 year old students participate in a vocational training program 5x per week. All members of a student's educational team (parent/guardian, students and school staff), should have input and collaborate on their departmentalized vocational program. All stakeholders begin by completing the Vocational 1 Assessments and the data used to determine what sites best connect to the student's interests and goals. Next, school staff will administer the Fall SANDI vocational section-baseline to determine the current level of each student. Teachers will meet in their Professional Learning Communities (PLC) to review/analyze data, student work samples and share strategies and resources in an effort to advance student growth/learning. Lastly, the students will take the Spring SANDI vocational section, benchmark to measure overall progress for the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 18-21 year old students will participate in a departmentalized vocational training program emphasizing post-secondary growth as demonstrated by a 5% increase in the Vocational Training (VT) section from the SANDI Fall baseline to the Spring benchmark. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Transition Coordinator will distribute Vocational 1 Assessment to teachers, parents and students (ages 12-21) to learn/update the goals & interests for students post-secondary placement. Teachers, parents, students 918- 11/18 Transition Coordinator, Teachers, Classroom teachers will administer SANDI benchmark to alternate assessment students (Students 18-21 years old will also complete the VT section of assessment). February 2019: SMART goals will be developed based upon the fall benchmarks for SANDI skills. Benchmark averages for Transition: Community fall of 2018 were: Students 9/18- 11/18 Admin, teachers Level 1: Level 2: Level 3: Transition coordinator and teachers assigned to vocational training will meet/reconvene to discuss students’ individual vocation training plan and possible departmentalization to advance learning. Teachers, parents, students 2x a year (in connection with PTC) Admin, transition coordinator, teachers Family worker will provide meetings to provide information and support to students transitioning into the community, Support will include description of transitional services for students as they age out of the DOE, respite services and agency placements. 2018-19 CEP 35 Classroom teachers will administer SANDI Spring assessment to alternate assessment students (Students 18-21 years old will also complete the VT section of assessment) and evaluate effectiveness of students’ vocational plans. Students 5/19- 6/19 Admin, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our school does not receive Title 1 funding. The Community Based Organization (CBO) partnerships and educational collaborations include: Ambrosino’s Pizzeria Applebee’s Restaurant (multiple locations) College of Staten Island Food Services College of Staten Island Book Store Companion Dog Training Center Fastbreak Basketball Center Gereicke Farm – NYU Collaboration Family Fruit Hillside Pool Club Key Food Supermarket Kingfisher Park Life Styles for the Disabled Organization (multiple locations) Nucci’s Restaurant Pier 76 Restaurant Senator Lanza’s Office (Staten Island) ShopRite Stop & Shop Supermarket (multiple locations) 2018-19 CEP 36  Superfresh Towne Deli Pizzeria United Cerebral Palsy Organization (SecurE-doc) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SANDI Assessment - funded by Central Office Unique Transition Curriculum - funded with NYS ALT ASSES CURR CW money Vocational Training Program - VTEA funds Teacher per session/per diem - funded with Tax Levy money Books, hardware, software - NYSTL funds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration will formulate classes (with teacher input) based on the following criteria:  homogeneous classroom ratios  Grade/age  Vocational training (interest/ability) by August 2018 -Administrator/Transition Coordinator will discuss assign vocational training sites to each class by September 2018. -Administration will assess and develop a professional development plan to ensure clear understanding of SANDI assessment by September 2018. -Teachers will administer SANDI Fall baseline to students by September-November 2018 2018-19 CEP 37  -Transition Coordinator will distribute Vocational 1 Assessment to: teachers, parents, and students by October 2018. -Transition Coordinator will work with teachers to departmentalize vocational training plans by November 2018. -Transition Coordinator will work with teachers to monitor vocational training plans by March 2019 -Teachers will administer SANDI Spring assessment to students by May - June 2019 -Administration, transition coordinator and teachers will evaluate the effectiveness students’ vocational training plans - June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Vocational 1 and SANDI (VTA section) assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) District 75 Placement Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Attainment one to one SANDI Assessments Unique FAST First Author small group instruction ABLLS-R Assistive Technology Report Cards SMiLE IEP Progress Reports Fountas and Pinnell During the school day. Mathematics District 75 Placement Flocabulary D 75 Framework Attainment SANDI Assessments Ablenet one to one small group instruction During the school day. ABLLS Assistive Technology Science IEP Progress Reports Unique Report Cards D75 Framework District 75 Placement Unique SANDI Assessments Assistive Technology one to one small group instruction During the school day. ABLLS D 75 Framework IEP Progress Reports Report Cards 2018-19 CEP 39  Social Studies District 75 Placement Unique one to one During the school day. SANDI Assessments Assistive Technology small group instruction ABLLS D 75 Framework IEP Progress Reports Report Cards At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEPs FBAs BIPs MAS Get Ready to Learn one to one TCI UDL small group instruction During the school day. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We do not have any students in STH. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 4. Alert Office of Pupil Transportation of change and provide car fare as necessary. Plan for meeting with assigned teacher and related service providers. 2018-19 CEP 41 Counselor assigned to student or class supports student and family. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Related Service Support. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Not applicable - not a title 1 school 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Not applicable - not a title 1 school Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable - not a title 1 school 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). not a title 1 school 2018-19 CEP 43  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable - not a title 1 school 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. not a title 1 school 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 44  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P37R, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P037R will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P37R, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Ensure that all students meet the State's Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 49  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name 037R Borough Staten Island School Number 037 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Florence Gorsky Coach Lisa Anderson ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Agnieszka Alicata Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Donny Swanson Coach School Counselor Jaclyn Scola Parent Ann Marrie Donato Parent Coordinator Donna Cornicelli Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 340 2018-19 CEP 52 Total number of ELLs 24 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.06%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Students in standardized assessment are evaluated with the Fountas and Pinnell.. Students in Alternate Assessment are evaluated with the ABLLS-R, SANDI Assessment and through their NYSAA portfolios. Moreover, our students are being assessed on an ongoing basis through teacher-created materials. The data indicates that our students are below grade level in literacy skills. The data informs us of their reading levels, deficits and strengths. It helps with determining appropriate resources to curriculum to provide differentiated instruction. This information also informs us of student grouping according to levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our teachers go to Professional Development trainings at the district and school level, co-teach, have regular cohort meetings, and have scheduled 1:1 teaching. When deciding on the selection of their training and workshops, they make sure that 15% of their professional development hours is related to language acquisition addressing the needs of English Language Learners. 2018-19 CEP 53  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Students who first enter the school system are given Home Language Identification Survey to assess what languages are being spoken in the house and if/what services might be needed. Then, our teachers use SANDI (October and June) and FAST (December and March) as summative assessments. For pre-K students ABLLS is used twice a year. Also, for ELLs, NYSESLAT is administered yearly in the spring to measure their progress. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our teachers go to Professional Development trainings at the school level and have regular cohort meetings to discuss data, then they co-teach and have scheduled 1:1 teaching to focus on the student's IEP goals, and write differentiated lesson plans with higher-order thinking questions to address those interventions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school utilizes data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RtI framework. To meet our students' diverse needs, all instruction is differentiated and is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. According to the RtI guidelines, students would move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 when they show a need for more intensive academic support. We base our Tier 2 and 3 instruction according to our ELLs' language needs and incorporate it into research-based intervention strategies. Additional data is provided by ABLLS-R, NYSAA and SANDI assessments. Analysis of these assessments is used to group students by instructional levels and provide tiered support. Data is analyzed to adjust and modify instruction on an on-going basis. Teachers also use data during their monthly cohort meetings to guide their instruction at their grade and/or subject level and also use it to write differentiated lesson plans with higher-order thinking questions to guide instruction in their individual classrooms and address students' personal needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT is used yearly to assess how the student's level is progressing and it shows which areas of literacy, reading, writing, speaking, or listening, should be focused on most during instruction. State ELA and Math are also use for ELLs in Standardized Assessment. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? When the ELA, Math and NYSESLAT scores become available, our teachers use them to share with fellow teachers at cohort meetings to discuss both students' progress and to make adjustments to their own planning and instruction if necessary. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL is provided by a certified teacher through both, a Stand-alone and an Integrated model of instruction. When appropriate, some students receive native language supports from paraprofessionals who speak the students’ native language. All ELLs are placed into heterogeneous (mixed proficiency) groups. Because 37R is a D75 school, our classes are ungraded, but students are grouped together according to their birth year and not more than three years apart. Similarly, an ELL group would consist of students not more than three years apart in age. 2018-19 CEP 54  b. TBE program. If applicable. Currently, our school only features Freestanding ENL program. c. DL program. If applicable. Currently, our school only features Freestanding ENL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELLs are grouped according to their ages and student-to-staff ratios. The maximum number of minutes is provided for each group given the geographical (multi-sited) and limited staffing constraints. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our school does not offer Dual Language Program, so all instruction is delivered in English. Teacher delivers content core using methods appropriate for the grade and level of the students. To foster language development of the students, they are grouped according to their age and proficiency level. Teacher uses guided interaction and with this method lessons are structured so students can work together to understand what they read. Another strategy used is authentic assessments; teacher uses a variety of activities to check students’ understanding, acknowledging that students who are learning a second language need a variety of ways to demonstrate their understanding of concepts that are not wholly reliant on advanced language skills. To help students absorb the content of the lesson, a lot of modelling as well as a variety of materials is used like graphic organizers, visuals, teacher-created worksheets, lots of sensory objects, adapted books and technology (for example QuickTalker 12, BIGmac Communicator, Ablenet). The methods that are used in instruction are those of Total Physical Response (TPR), The Sheltered Content ENL and Cooperative Learning Method. Total Physical Response is a language teaching strategy which introduces new language through a series of commands to physically enact an event. The student responds to the commands with action. For beginning students, an advantage of TPR is that they are not required to make oral responses until they feel more comfortable with the new language, and it is also another way for non-verbal children to communicate. For example, during reading time, if the story is about a character who goes to the forest and hears all different kinds of sounds, the teacher might keep repeating the word "ears" while pointing to her ears and asking the students to do the same. In cooperative classrooms, students are taught to find value in helping one another to learn. As a whole class, rather than individually, they accomplish a set of goals. The classroom is organized so that the goals are most likely to be attained when students cooperate and collaborate. It increases a sense of student-ownership of the classroom environment and activities. Most often it is done in smaller teams, that are further divided into even smaller groups. Even though cooperative learning is not expressly a strategy to assist language learners, but rather is used with students at many different cognitive levels, whether native speakers of English or multilingual learners, it has been found very successful when learning a new language. In our school we often use activities like Round Robin, where teacher presents a category for discussion and students go around the group naming items that fit that category or Round Table where teacher presents a category, for example words that start with "g," and then students go around the group writing a word that starts with that letter. Another activity we use is a Tea Party where students form two lines facing each other, a teacher asks a question and students discuss the answer with the partner facing them. After one minute one line moves to the right so that everybody has new partners and the teacher asks a new question. This continues for about five minutes and we like to use this method to review material before a quiz. Another activity we like to use often in our cooperative classrooms is a Group Jigsaw which means that the text is divided into parts and each student gets a different part to read to themselves. Then students retell and teach their friends all information they learned and put all pieces of the "puzzle" together as a team to make a complete text. The goal of the Sheltered English Model is for ELL students to develop English language skills in content classes. English is taught through content areas by including a strong language development component. The purpose of the language development component is to teach English language learners to communicate (listen, speak, read, and write) in English. This component takes into account the ELL student’s current English language proficiency level and guides the teacher in providing 2018-19 CEP 55  the appropriate instruction for each level. An example for such method might be a "Find Someone Who" activity where students are given a scavenger hunt list of things they need to find out by finding someone who might know the answer. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We make sure that the Home Language Surveys are administered only by licensed pedagogues who are specially trained to do so. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We currently do not have any SIFE students. However, if we were to have any, we would assign a class buddy for him/her that would make a transition to a classroom setting much easier, and, at the same time, offer behavior example and support. We differentiate our instruction depending on the level of the student's proficiency and their disability, not so much on their length in the program. So Newcomers, Developing ELLs and Long-Term ELLs would all use different kinds of graphic organizers, might have a class buddy system and will definitely have adapted texts. Their differentiation will affect everything in the classroom, starting with the level and complexity of the questions. The teacher would ask students open-ended questions vs. yes/no questions; also using Bloom's Taxonomy, higher order thinking questions would go from Knowledge through Comprehension and Analysis and all the way to Evaluation. Books and materials used would also be distributed accordingly. And finally, the tasks the students would be asked to perform would range from just gazing, pointing, matching pictures to pictures, matching pictures to words, drawing, writing simple words and sentences, to even writing complex sentences and full paragraphs. Former ELLs, after scoring Commanding on NYSESLAT and exiting ELL status, receive Integrated ENL for two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Classroom teachers work collaboratively with the ENL teacher and the related service providers to make sure our students get the best instruction possible. Our school uses a few programs specifically designed for Special Education like Unique Learning System, Attainment and the D75 Alternate Assessment Curriculum Framework. To enhance their lessons our teachers also use a variety of grade- and age-appropriate materials like Leveled Readers and they also create a multitude of resources themselves, like graphic organizers, adapted books, visuals, or worksheets. They further enhance their lessons with sensory objects and technology (QuickTalker 12, BIGmac Communicator, Ablenet, IPad and Smart Board). UDL strategies are used throughout the school and are incorporated into each lesson. To accelerate the English language acquisition of ELL-SWDs we use differentiation while using the strategies from the Total Physical Response method, Cooperative Learning method, and the Sheltered Content ENL method. Depending on the student's disability and performance level, differentiation could mean that if, for example the ELL student is not verbal and cannot write but can read a little, he/she would have the vocabulary words recorded on the device (e.g. QuickTalker) for easy access and his worksheets would include matching answers to question instead of writing them. Or, during Cooperative Learning, an ELL in a wheelchair that that has a difficulty moving his/her hands, could be responsible for reading the text to his group while the other team mates have recording/writing roles. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At present, students are scheduled as per their IEP, during small group instruction within the same programmatic ratio. We are expanding opportunities for the least restrictive environment during community based instruction and work sites within the Staten Island Community. ENL strategies are integrated during these opportunities. 2018-19 CEP 56  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school uses a few targeted intervention programs. For students struggling with phonics, spelling and handwriting we use Fundations. Students that read below expected grade level work with a multi sensory Smile, and students that struggle with writing use First Author. To help students learn number sense, our teacher use Attainment. Also, AbbleNet is used for Pre-K students. Since we do not have any SIFE students, only Newcomers, Developing, Long-Term and Former ELLs are targeted by those intervention programs. Even though English is used for instruction, sometimes Home Language is used by a Placement Paraprofessional if the student is requires extra help in understanding content of the lesson. Should a SIFE student enter our school organization, he/she would be targeted by those same intervention programs, and also, they would be provided with a class buddy, a classmate who would help them adjust to the new surrounding much faster and would also offer behavior example and support. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have teamed up with P373R and P25R in a Learning Partners Program and we will train more teachers in a First Author Writing Program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We did not have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded access to all school programs through pull-out and push-in type of service as well as collaboration with the classroom teacher. They receive wide rage of related services that are mandated by their IEPs, like Speech, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Vision, and Hearing. During school hours we organize fun festivities for all our students, like parades, shows, dances, etc. where all classes participate, and that would include ELLs, too. After school activities would include seasonal/holiday dances, shows, fairs and carnivals where all students and their families are invited. Invitations in English and preferred home language are sent home in advance to advertise the event. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To help students absorb the content of the lesson, a lot of modelling as well as a variety of materials is used like graphic organizers, visuals, teacher-created worksheets, lots of sensory objects, adapted books and technology (QuickTalker 12, BIGmac Communicator, Ablenet, Smartboard, IPad). 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our school only features an ENL program model. Home language support is usually delivered through a paraprofessional who speaks that language or through a classmate in a peer/cultural awareness activity. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school's staff (teachers, related services, as well as administration) are in constant contact through formal and informal meetings and conversations to monitor progress and ensure that all required services are appropriate. Through scheduling we make sure those services correspond to ELLs' age levels and by following Common Core Learning Standards we make sure they are geared towards their grade levels. All our ELLs' cognitive needs are taken into consideration when planning instruction and all resources are adapted accordingly. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We believe that collaboration is the key so we try to be professional and help each other out and share with what we can. We share books with the other school, make copies for one another, exchange lesson plans, or even provide extra room space if there is a need for it. Also, to help students absorb the content of the lesson, a lot of modelling as well as a variety of materials 2018-19 CEP 57  is used like graphic organizers, visuals, teacher-created worksheets, lots of sensory objects, adapted books and technology (QuickTalker 12, BIGmac Communicator, Ablenet, IPad). 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). A Chapter 683 summer program is offered to newly enrolled students before they begin the school year in September but it is the only program offered universally. All other activities differ as per individual needs of a student and include a meeting of a parent with an ENL teacher, a school counselor, an administrator or a parent coordinator. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer any language electives at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, our school only features ENL program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? PS 37R’s professional development plan includes topics pertaining to the education of ELLs such as: strategies, the New Language Arts Progressions and balanced literacy in classrooms that work collaboratively with the ENL teacher. Staff development will be ongoing. All newly hired teachers will be trained at the district office in the mandatory 10 hours of Jose P. training. The ENL teacher will go to ELLs oriented PDs and then will turnkey all information to her colleagues, will model instructional strategies to classroom teachers as well as to all related service staff. Additional adaptations of ENL materials will be made for education of ELL students with severe disabilities. These areas will be addressed during professional development days, chancellor's days, common prep periods, and during cohort meetings. There will also be also multiple workshops throughout the year that the teachers will sign up for individually at the UFT office or at the district level. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teacher supports Middle and HS staff in aligning instruction to vocational/career education opportunities and in students' work site assignments. There are multiple workshops and trainings throughout the year that teachers can participate in, at the school, at the UFT office, and at the district level. Additionally, as per CR Part 154 regulations, a minimum of 15% of the professional development provided to all our teachers and administrators specifically addresses the needs of ELLs. We make sure that at least 50% of the required professional development hours of our ENL teacher (obtained at the District 75 OELL) are dedicated 2018-19 CEP 58  to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. We keep all our agendas and attendance sheets in the Professional Development folder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our schools provides Parent Annual IEP Review meetings according to the needs of individual parent. In addition, we individually schedule conferences with the parents to discuss the ELLs language development progress and future needs. The parents are made aware through the letter in their preferred language of the available translation and interpretation services and are asked if they would be required. If yes, those services will be provided. So far, we only had to use those services at in-house level. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are involved in our school through IEP meetings. Also, our school organizes a lot of after school activities for our students, like seasonal/holiday dances, shows, fairs and carnivals where all students and their families are invited. Moreover, our parent coordinator host different workshops for parents. Invitations in English and preferred home language are sent home in advance to advertise the event as well as the letter informing the families of the availability of the translation and interpretation services. During the event parent coordinator as well as the ENL teacher make themselves available to the families to assist with any concerns or to answer any questions. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Florence Gorsky, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS37 School DBN: 75R037 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Florence Gorsky Title Principal Donny Swanson Assistant Principal Donna Cornicelli Parent Coordinator Agnieszka Alicata ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ann Marie Donato Parent N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Kettler Louissaint Arthur Fusco N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 06/27/17 06/27/17 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75R037 School Name: PS37 Superintendent: Ketler Louissai The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Donna Cornicelli Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The ENL teacher works in conjunction with the parent coordinator reviewing all ELL Home Language Identification Surveys (administered by a licensed pedagogue) and ATS Adult Preferred Language report (RAPL). The parent coordinator meets with parents of newly admitted students to assess any possible language needs. If translation services are required, the D75 Parent Resource Office is contacted for assistance. The parent coordinator also sends a survey to all classroom teachers to inquire as to whether parents of students need translation. We use all that information about parents' language preferences and possible translation and interpretation needs when we prepare for all the events in our school, both scheduled meetings with the parents as well as informal activities, like carnivals, dances, fairs and other festivities for the whole families. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 62  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral AO (Amoy) AR (Arabic) CH (Chinese) HA (Haitian Creole) NO (English) SP (Spanish) 0 0 1 1 517 17 0 0 0.19 0.19 96.46 3.17 1 2 0 1 513 19 0.19 0.37 0 0.19 95.71 3.54 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None of these languages make up 10% or more of the population of our school. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families parent-teacher conference announcements November and March New York State testing dates and schedules New York State testing dates and schedules school announcements and communication letters as needed Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translations are done in-house by a staff member who is a native speaker of Spanish and is fluent in both oral and written Spanish and English. To ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents, we send them out about 3 weeks prior to the event. Translations are done in-house by a staff member who is a native speaker of Spanish and is fluent in both oral and written Spanish and English. To ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents, we send them out about 3 weeks prior to the event. Translations are done in-house by a staff member who is a native speaker of Spanish and is fluent in both oral and written Spanish and English. To ensure timely provision 2018-19 CEP 63  N/A of translated documents to parents, we send them out about 3 weeks prior to the event or as needed. N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide parent-teacher conferences November and March Open School Days October IEP meetings individual basis curriculum night (meet & greet) September interpretation service(s)? So far we only had to use Spanish translations. All our translations are done in-house by a staff member who is a native speaker of Spanish and is fluent in both oral and written Spanish and English languages. As far as other languages go, if translation is needed and requested by a parent in advance, we will request it from Translation and Interpretation Unit at the DOE office. So far we only had to use Spanish translations. All our translations are done in-house by a staff member who is a native speaker of Spanish and is fluent in both oral and written Spanish and English languages. As far as other languages go, if translation is needed and requested by a parent in advance, we will request it from Translation and Interpretation Unit at the DOE office. So far we only had to use Spanish translations. All our translations are done in-house by a staff member who is a native speaker of Spanish and is fluent in both oral and written Spanish and English languages. As far as other languages go, if translation is needed and requested by a parent in advance, we will request it from Translation and Interpretation Unit at the DOE office. So far we only had to use Spanish translations. All our translations are done in-house by a staff member who is a native speaker of Spanish and is fluent in both oral and written Spanish and English languages. As far as other languages go, if translation is needed and requested by a parent in advance, 2018-19 CEP 64  we will request it from Translation and Interpretation Unit at the DOE office. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. So far, our families required Spanish translation only, so in the event of a school emergency, the staff member who is a native speaker of Spanish and is fluent in both English and Spanish languages, is called over the PA system to report immediately to the main office and student's parents/guardians are notified of the situation as per blue card instructions. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 because every September, at the first orientation meeting, the ENL teacher reminds staff about everything that pertains to ELLs, like parents' right to free translation and interpretation services or teachers' responsibility to sign up for ELL specific training to fill 15% of the required 100 PD hours. The ENL teacher makes sure to stress for the classroom teachers how important it is that their ELLs' parents participate and have access to programs and services that are critical to their child's learning (which is Chancellor's Reg. A-663). After ENL teacher makes all these reminders, classroom teachers are required to send home with students information to parents to inform them about what they are entitled to and what is offered at our school. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents whose native language is other than English will receive the translated Parents' Bill of Rights & Responsibilities in order to be made aware of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. A sign in each of the covered languages is posted near the main entrance of the school indicating the availability of interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 65  Our school uses parent surveys that are sent home to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services and they are kept on file. We also use informal feedback in the form of verbal conversations with parents when needed. 2018-19 CEP 66 
