2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R038 School Name: P.S. 038 GEORGE CROMWELL Principal: NANCY MURILLO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 38 The George Cromwell School 31R038 353100010038 Pre-K-5 School Number (DBN): 421 Lincoln Avenue/Staten Island New York, 10306 718-351-1225 Phone Number: 718-979-2487 Fax: Nancy Murillo nmurillo@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Nancy Murillo Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Mrs. Christina Kuzar Mrs. Nicole Ryan Mrs. Emma Dukhovny N/A N/A N/A Mike Rosen District Information Geographical District: 31 Mrs. Vincenza Gallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, NY, 10301 Superintendent’s Office Address: vgallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5667 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Petrides Complex Kevin Moran FSC: Executive Director: Petrides complex-715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, NY, 10301 Executive Director’s Office Address: KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-755-7339 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nancy Murillo, Principal Mrs. Delta Mc Keon/UFT Designee Mrs. Nicole Ryan N/A Mrs. Nicole Ryan N/A N/A Mike Rosen/CEC Mrs. Ashantay Carroll Mrs. TatyanaLagrange *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member Parent Member 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Mrs. Christina Rosario Mrs. Alla Slabodina Mrs. Sebnem Dagli Mrs. Bonnie Pitera Mrs. Suzana Marke Mrs. ErminaAvdiu Mrs. Emma Dukhovny Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Member Parent Member Parent Member Teacher Member5th grade TeacherMember 2nd Grade ICT Teacher Member 4th Grade Assistant Principal Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview OUR VISION IS TO BE: THE SMARTEST THE BEST AND THE BRIGHTEST 2018-19 CEP 9  PEOPLE WE CAN BE THROUGH OUR WORDS AND OUR ACTIONS. WE COMMIT OURSELVES TO BEING: RESPONSIBLE KIND CARING AND GIVING MEMBERS OF THE COMMUNITY. OUR SCHOOL COMMUNITY BELIEVES THAT: BY WORKING AND LEARNING TOGETHER WE WILL ACHIEVE OUR GOAL OF BECOMING CURIOUS, LIFE-LONG LEARNERS AND CITIZENS WHO ARE COLLEGE/CAREER READY AND ABLE TO COMPETE IN A 21ST CENTURY GLOBAL ECONOMY. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 38 is a warm and welcoming Collaborative Learning Community. Within our community there is a scholarly buzz representational of our professionalism and dedication to motivating and inspiring students with an emphasis on academic excellence. We pride ourselves in knowing our families and our children. Established partnerships with a variety of Community Based Organizations (CBOs) have contributed tremendously to the instructional quality of our school and foster high levels of student proficiency and academic excellence. We are proud of our long standing partnership with Teacher’s College which has facilitated the professional growth of our pedagogy and classroom practice. Our teachers are well versed in reading and writing units of study and over the years have developed their own rigorous Common Core aligned Reading and Writing Curriculum. Our consistent high levels of student proficiency are a testament to the rigorous teaching and learning that take place and all of our systems/structures are centered on student learning and drive academic excellence. Reso A Grants received through our partnerships with local politicians such as Councilman Matteo and Borough President Oddo, have contributed to the infra-structure upgrades that have enhanced our instructional curriculum, promote 21 st Century learning, and have provided us with Stem Labs we will incorporate beginning in 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP 10  Through the years, these Reso-A allocations have enabled us to add new Promethean smart boards in every classroom, a state of the art computer lab, a state of the art sound system, and a library media center . One of the former Chancellor's initiatives was the integration of Arts in Education. We receive annual CASA Grant funding to support enrichment through the arts which has enriched the lives of our students and provided them with tools and a lens to work hard and aspire to their dreams so that all children will be college/career ready. Through annual CASA Grant funding from Councilman Matteo, a continuous partnership with the Staten Island Children's Musuem has provided extracurricular enrichment through the Arts for our students such as theater, Hip Hop/Dance, Zumba and Salsa fitness, as well as opportunities for our families to attend museum exhibitions on free or low cost days. This 2018-2019 school year we will embark on a new partnership with Sun Dog theater to continue this initiative and provide our diverse population immersion in theater, dance and visual arts. United Activities Unlimited is yet another long standing partnership which provides our families with a self-sustaining after-school program on site to meet the needs of those families that work and need after care for their children. Children are provided a snack, engage in reading, homework help, and various fun filled and creative after school activities. PS 38 has established a partnership with the highly acclaimed Staten Island Technical School through their VISIT program which invites our students to interactively engage in various programs offered at their school. This opportunity provides our students with possibilities for future study interests as well as career interests. More over, Staten Island Tech allows us to host our 5th grade graduation at their location demonstrating community partnership as well as Academic Excellence. In the 2018-2019 school year we will work to expand this partnership to establish a stronger bridge between the demands of a 21st Century technological society and the opportunities for technological advancement we can provide to our students. PS 38s technology Impact team has hopes to articulate, plan, and brainstorm ideas with staff from Staten Island Tech who have an expertise in this area to foster our own Technology vision and plan of action. Strong partnerships are instrumental in meeting our students needs and providing all students with rich academic experiences. We value these partnerships as they enable us to build capacity as a staff through state of the art professional development and afford our students experiences rich in the arts such as film making, theater, dance, and much more. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 38 has approximately 357 students and is a culturally and academically diverse community with a population comprised of 24% English Language Learners (and growing) and 23% Students with Special Needs. Many students come to us from various educational settings and require additional time and pacing to acclimate to our curriculum. Many of our newcomers perform well below proficiency standards, require time to adjust to our curriculum and warrant additional supports. Many of our families are immigrants new to this country. 2017-2018 data demonstrates a student population comprised of 11.2% Asian (and growing), 2.27% Black, 33.9% Hispanic (our most transient population), 1.7% Multi-Racial, and 51% White and these numbers continue to fluctuate. Demographically we reside in the Midland Beach section of Staten Island and historically data trends in enrollment demonstrate our very transient population. **It is important to note that we have a growing influx of English Language Learners and currently have 80 ENL students who receive ENL services and an additional 27 who are recently commanding which we continue to support through Alternative Pathways. Our English Language L earner population is comprised of Asian, Russian, Polish, Albanian, Arabic, Chinese, Hispanic, and Ukranian. We celebrate and respect our diverse community and work diligently to make all of our new comers feel accepted and welcome. Many of our students come from countries with different cultural habits, languages, rituals, routines, and beliefs. They offer a wealth of experience and knowledge for the rest of our PS 38 community and we integrate many culturally diverse assemblies throughout the year. For example: Temple for the Arts (African American music 2018-19 CEP 11  and history of), The New York City Chinese Cultural Center, Caravan Puppet theater, etc. All grades research and create a cultural assembly during the year and every November before Thanks Giving, we invite all of our families to our Annual Cultural Cromwell Cafe. This annual event is a celebration of our diversity where everyone brings an ethnic covered dish from their culture, we dress up in our cultural ethnicity, and we break bread together as we celebrate that we are one in a world of difference. Aligned to both the Chancellor's Initiatives and District's initiatives, providing "Equity and Access" for all of students regardless of proficiency level remains a priority. Our curriculum is tailored to meet the diverse needs of our students providing them with multiple entry points. In response to the strong need for extracurricular support for students in the lowest 1/3, we implement many support programs to provide them with the skill development needed to begin to meet academic grade level standard. Extra curricular programs are data driven to meet students where they are at and move them along the learning continuum with an emphasis on foundational skills and academic language for students acquiring the English language. In addition we provide and integrate social emotional support programs and services and have partnered with both the Jewish Board and the YMCA. Our staff has had training in Sanford Harmony and integrates "Buddy Up" activities into the day to foster student's social emotional development. All staff is trained in de-escalation to better meet the social emotional needs of our special education population and any student who warrants support. The following staff are trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Support (TCIS): Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, School Psychologist and 4 Crisis Paraprofessionals. We have 2 ENL teachers to support our ENL population and their families. All English Language learners are invited to our Title III language rich support program to develop their reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills as they acquire the English language. We institute both targeted and data driven push in and push out academic intervention support in reading/writing and across content areas.. To further support all students in ELA and math we implement several technology based programs which meet children where they are at academically and grow them along their own learning continuum. These programs are Reading Eggs and Math Seeds (K-2), First in Math K-5 (begins in 2018-2019), and we plan to integrate I-Ready to support students in grades 3-5 in both ELA and Math this year as well. We offer before school reading programs that which are data driven for targeted sub groups, Saturday Test Prep Academy, Morning Math AIS, etc. These are just some of the programs designed to help meet their needs and it is important to note that all programs are based on budget availability. CASA grant monies enrich and stimulate our students' creativity in arts after school enrichment programs. We target our top 1/3 of our fifth grade and our top 1/3 of our 4th graders inviting them to participate in our Saturday and after school VR Quest Virtual Technology Video Game Designing Club. We offer a morning math AIS program for students in need of foundational math skills and we offer 3 cycles of our BOKS (Building Our Kids Success) after school physical education program. Families of our special needs populations are supported in a variety of ways throughout the year. September begins with a "Meet The Staff at Orientation" night where families are invited to join the Administration and support staff as they share School wide initiatives and shifts for the current year, data, policy and protocol, as well as support staff roles. Throughout the year ,teachers continue to invite families in on Family Engagement Tuesdays to discuss and celebrate their child's progress and their needs and to provide strategies so they can continue to assist and support their children at home. Staff is flexible for working families and will work with them to arrange a time that works best for all parties when Tuesdays don't. Families are surveyed for interest in workshops aligned to what their children are expected to learn and how they can help them at home. We take stock of our families needs and interests, analyze the data, and use it to design and implement workshops tailored to their needs throughout the year. Our School Implementation Team works collaboratively with families of students with IEPs to help them understand their child's IEPS and needs and how we as a school are supporting them in relation to their goals. They also plan series of workshops on topics related to IEPS, related services, and social emotional growth. This team has worked diligently to establish a partnership between the Jewish Board and YMCA to create a continued plan of action to support all students and their families. This is inclusive of bringing in specialists to host informative workshops for families and to work with and plan along side teachers in classrooms to better meet the needs of their students. 2018-19 CEP 12  Every month we invite all of our families to an Instructional Parents as Learning Partners Day. This day allows families to join their children in their classrooms and work with their children on a curricular area of focus. These sessions are very popular as they provide families with a clearer idea of what and how their child is learning. Following the session both the Principal and Assistant Principal meet with the families to debrief and further discuss what they saw and answer any questions. When budget allows we like to give families a little take away gift such as math manipulatives or a book they can use with their child at home. Our own Common Core aligned curriculum maps provide all of the skills students are expected to master by the end of the year. Our goal is the strong continued implementation of tailored Instruction which is data-driven with an emphasis on small group instruction which is carefully monitored in all content areas. This is inclusive of the implementation of student goal setting and formative assessments to empower students to evaluate their own learning and make a plan to grow themselves as learners. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Results as per the Framework for Great Schools: Framework Element % of Positive Responses and Gains/Deficits score Compared to District and City Areas of Celebration Targeted Areas for Improvement in 2018-2019 Rigorous Instruction 82%-3.57 District: -12% City: -11% Supportive Environment Collaborative Teachers 89%-3.86 Effective School Leadership 92%-3.99 City: +.10% Exceeded common core shifts in literacy and math 84%-3.55 District: -.35% City: -.37% District: -.29% City: -.08% Exceeded cultural awareness/inclusive classroom instruction/peer collaboration District: -.06% X X-Specifically Academic Press We did not meet target X-specifically Classroom behavior correlated to academic press X-Specifically Innovation and collective responsibility 2018-19 CEP 13  Exceeded Principal coherence and Principal instructional leadership District: +.05% City: +.28% Strong Family/Community Ties 94%-3.87 Exceeded teacher outreach to parents X District: +.01 City: +.15 91%-3.83 Exceeded parent teacher trust and parent Principal trust X Trust Areas of Focus for 2018-2019: Last year we targeted Rigorous Instruction which will continue to be a targeted area in 2018-2019. Although in this area of the Framework we scored lower than the other elements of the Framework, it is important to note that compared to our 16-17 survey score (3.45), we did make a significant 12 point gain (3.57). This significant gain demonstrates we are moving in an upward trajectory toward our goals. 2018 ELA State Test data demonstrates we have sustained proficiency levels in ELA at 42% but it is important to note that we tested 15 students less than 2017, thus actually making some gains. 2018 State Math data demonstrates 3% gains in student proficiency from 42% in 2017 to 45% in 2018. It is important to note that we tested 21 students less in 2018, thus making more of an impact on academic rigor. We will continue with our rigorous practice in hopes to continue to sustain and grow student proficiency and progress even more in 2019 with particular attention to academic press. As per the 2017-2018 School Survey 26% of our teachers said students did not feel challenged and 48% felt students did not respond to challenging test questions. 45% of teachers also said students do not respond to challenging questions in class. This demonstrates a need to focus on Danielson Framework component 3B-Questioning, as we develop our instructional practice and teacher pedagogy. An area of focus will be using the Depth of Knowledge and Bloom's Taxonomy to inform planning and lift the level of rigor/productive struggle as we develop student thought processes. Equally, survey results in the area of Supportive Environment demonstrate a need to develop student listening skills as 35% of teachers felt students do not listen carefully to and follow directions, making careless mistakes. Teachers also noted student's disconnect toward the importance of completing homework and trying their best. This data correlates to the deficit in academic press in the Framework area of Rigorous Instruction. Therefore, we will continue to engage students in purposeful learning emphasizing not just what they must do, but how they can achieve their goals and "why" it is important. (Impact-ful learning with a purpose). The Framework component of Collaborative Teachers, specifically innovation and collective responsibility, will facilitate these areas in need of improvement as 2017-2018 survey results demonstrate a lack of teacher enthusiasm to share ideas collectively and to participate in taking responsibility for improving the school. Impact Team work will be a driving force for making adaptations in our methods and delivery of purposeful and impact-ful instruction. As 2018-19 CEP 14  reflective practitioners we will continue to form think tanks to improve and evaluate impact of instruction on student participation and achievement. On going grade and vertical team Inquiry work will support this area of focus. One of our goals in this area is to continue to develop teacher leaders (aligned to the Chancellor's Initiative "Developing People" and accelerating Learning and Instruction) through on going differentiated professional development and lead teachers will lead Impact Teams as well as turn key PD and best practices to their peers. Veteran teachers will be utilized to coach and support novice teachers through a "to-with-and by" approach. Veteran staff environments will be used as lab-sites for peers to observe and learn from, and planning and debriefing sessions to discuss practice in teams will be an integral part of this practice. Areas of Strength/Celebration Trust/Strong Family/Community Ties, and Effective School Leadership: Although we made strong progress in most areas of the framework for the 2017-2018 school year, the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which we made the most progress over the past year, are: Effective School Leadership, Strong Family Community Ties, and Trust. 3 years ago we initiated a "Partners With Families...Partners In Learning" initiative to bridge the gap between and strengthen family community ties. This work has proved to be successful as evidenced by our 2017-2018 survey results of 94% positive response rate and +.28% gains compared to the city average. We obtained a score point value over 90% in each of these framework areas and have exceeded Target with a metric score of 4.00 or higher in the areas of: program coherence, Principal instructional leadership, teacher out reach to parents, parent-teacher trust, and parent-Principal trust within these framework areas. It is important to note that although we scored under 90% in the framework areas of Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers, we did exceed target in the areas of common core shifts in both literacy and math, cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction, and peer collaboration within these two framework areas. 1. Collaborative Teachers/Trust: Our staff is committed to the success and improvement of our school and they have and will continue to have on-going opportunities to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. As a Professional Learning Community we take pride in how we have grown our teacher pedagogy to build capacity. Veteran teachers embrace new staff and take them under their wing as they move along the learning continuum. Additionally, all new teachers are supported with a mentor and are provided with common planning time. Over the years we have crafted our own reading and writing curriculum that is aligned to the Common Core State Standards, The Danielson Framework for Teaching and Learning, and The Depth of Knowledge. Our curriculum maps are rigorous and aligned to the vision of the standards of what it means to be a literate person in the 21 st century. In our classrooms, visitors will see the variety of skills and understandings taught that students are expected to demonstrate independently as they apply what they learn to the world around them. At PS 38 we will continue to institute our popular book club for all staff members wishing to participate. This club brings us together as a professional learning community and as educators who love reading. Every 2 months we come together to discuss a different book which is recommended by staff members who are avid readers and enjoy sharing good books with each other. We lead by example and continue to foster a love of literacy. In addition to pleasure reading across a variety of genres, we also implement Professional Book Club Practice during PD and Inquiry time with 2018-19 CEP 15  an emphasis on improved pedagogy and student achievement and the use of formative assessment to closely monitor student progress and empower students. An HR Committee will continue to empower and engage staff in the observation and hiring of new staff: We have established a hiring committee comprised of staff members who have a rigorously diverse expert lens on teaching and learning. This is inclusive of specific content area teachers (science, art), IEP teacher, Integrated Co-Teaching members, early childhood teachers, data-specialist, building leaders, etc. Teachers collaborate on types of questions to ask, methods and approaches new teachers should be familiar with, and data they want the teacher being observed to analyze. The team in collaboration with the administration observes a demo- lesson, interviews the teacher, and collectively participates in hiring decisions. This is one way we empower our staff to have a voice and choice in developing school culture. Continued work of our Exceptional School Assessment Team/School Implementation Team (SAT/SIT): We will continue to monitor our children very closely and we know all of our children. We have very strong Response To Intervention (RTI) methods which is a school wide initiative to support children in areas of need both academically and socially/emotionally. Monitoring for Results is also used to track students performing in the lowest third. Our school has established a classroom and school culture that is risk free, fosters agency and independence, and where children are challenged cognitively. We will continue our very strong parent outreach as our goal is to build a positive relationship with our families. We have an open door policy and provide parents with support to help their children at home, academically, physically and emotionally. Our Parent Coordinator is an integral part of the relationship between all stakeholders in the school. We will continue our Partners With Families...Partners in learning initiative. We work very closely with our School Leadership Team and PTA through our Circle of Collaboration to meet all students and families needs. 2. Strengthening Family Community Ties/Trust: The 2017-2018 NYC Framework for Great schools report demonstrates our continued success with the interventions and programs implemented to strengthen family community ties and build trust as a school community with the overall goal of continued gains in student achievement. 2018-19 Curricular-Aligned Parent Workshop Goals:  Continued Partners With Families...Partners in learning Initiative. Workshops will continue to evolve and will continue to be tailored to family needs throughout the 2018-2019 school year. *We will continue to survey staff for workshops ideas they observe a need for. This data is used in conjunction with our parent survey to implement workshops to meet the needs of our community throughout the year.  Parent feedback and interests will continue to be gathered at various family engagement activities and workshops through exit slips, reflections, surveys, conversation and through our work with our School Leadership Team and PTA.  The School leadership Team will engage in at least one Learning Walk with a lens aligned to 2018-2019 Quality Review Rubric with an emphasis on indicator 1.1 (ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to CCLSs and content standards) in order to provide parents with a knowledge base and supports they can use with their children at home to better support their children in the work we do. ● We will continue to inform, modify, translate and provide specific PD for our English Language Learner parent population. 2018-19 CEP 16  ● Workshops will continue to be designed with a focus on State ELA and Math Test/Preparation, Special Education/IEP, ENL, our Go Math Curriculum, and the use of formative assessments. These will be available to parents in three consecutive cycles on selected Family Engagement Tuesdays to afford all parents the opportunity to attend one or all workshops. ● Continue Pre-Kindergarten Workshops on various topics related to the development and learning of our youngest students. ● Continue Pre-Kindergarten mommy and me sessions in the arts to develop a better understanding of how the arts are blended into our curriculum. ● Science project workshop for fourth grade students completing science fair projects. ● Hands on Science, social studies, and art workshops that are aligned to our rigorous practice and learning and can inform parents of our methods and approaches through inquiry and projects. ● “Navigating Go Math Technology Supports and Links” A hands-on actively engaging workshop that will provide parents with skills that can be used at home to support student learning (in computer lab) Workshops on the use of formative assessments, what they are, how children use progressions and various tools to grow and monitor themselves as reflective learners along a learning continuum. We will continue to to strengthen our "Circle of Collaboration" between Administration, the School Leadership Team, the PTA, and our Families with the over arching goal of student achievement at the center of everything we do. 3. Effective School Leadership: The data demonstrates that we supersede the city average by + .10%. As instructional leaders, my AP and I provide Professional Development with the expectation of effective practice and transference into classroom practice resulting in student achievement. As change agents, we must provide staff the tools and support they need, but must also hold them accountable to implementation. Thus, this can impact how effective school leadership is perceived by staff on the survey. We have increased trust and collaboration and continue to work towards improvement in rigorous instruction. In 2017-2018 we continued to implement the use of success criteria and formative assessments to develop assessment capable learners. This work will continue to grow and deepen in the 2018-2019 school year as Rigorous Instruction will continue to be and area of focus. Common Core Learning Standards will continue to be integrated in all of our reading, writing, and math curriculum maps and our classroom practice. Our staff and paraprofessionals will continue to be immersed in extensive professional development on the Danielson Framework for Teaching and Learning. Every facet of our professional lens for lifting the rigor of teaching and learning revolves around curriculum, planning, and best practices. Our cluster teachers will continue to implement increased use of formative assessments and success criteria that will ensure transference across content areas and disciplines.The focus is always on improving instruction and heavily emphasizes pedagogy representative of the Effective and Highly Effective Domains of the Framework. All professional learning is focused around school wide goals and initiatives. 2018-19 CEP 17  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R038 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 376 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 25 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 70.0% % Attendance Rate 61.7% % Reduced Lunch 19.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 30.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 49.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 4% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 41.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 45 45 93.5% 8.2% 19.7% 3.5% 14.9% 2.4% 2 4% 4.1 45.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data drives the composition of our CEP Goals yearly. Our ongoing assessments and careful monitoring of student performance and progress determines our goals. As noted below the goals are carefully aligned to data, student work, our curriculum, our support systems, our focused instructional goal, classroom practices and professional development that is tailored around the needs of our staff and children. Targeted Plan of Action for Rigorous Instruction 2018-2019 as per School Quality Guide and School Survey Data: Rigorous Instruction (3.57,) is a targeted area for improvement we will focus on for 2018-2019. Some areas of focus will be:  Teacher responsiveness during small group instruction and lean coaching  Continued use of formative and summative assessments  Rigorous questioning and inquiry to foster student discussions  Culturally responsive teaching   Continue to grow 21st century learning through use of technology and a variety of mediums  Rigorous PD cycles  Science: Continued roll out of new standards and implementation of STEM Our School-Wide Instructional Focus for 2018-2019 will continue to be: "Small Group Instruction with an emphasis on consistent monitoring for student understanding across all content areas through the use of on-going summative and formative assessments and actionable feedback." We believe that:   If we ground our work in the Common Core State Standards and the Danielson Framework, closely monitoring students’ performance and progress to target their needs, then we can move all students along the learning continuum. If we implement Formative Assessments with clear learning intentions and success criteria, while providing consistent actionable and meaningful feedback, then students will successfully and independently engage in goal setting and self-monitoring to grow themselves as learners. 2018-19 CEP 19   If actionable and meaningful feedback is consistent across grades and ALL content areas, (not just reading and writing), then we can provide a clear portrait of student mastery across content areas, thus furthering student learning. This goal includes but is not limited to the careful monitoring of student progress (both on the go during teaching and learning and during collaborative inquiry sessions), the careful evaluation of all of the systems and structures we have in place to support student learning such as: RTI, Saturday Academy, After School Programs, small group instruction and Academic Intervention. Reflective learning empowers staff and students to monitor their own progress utilizing various progressions for learning while understanding the success criteria that align them to a particular level of performance. We utilize various content specific learning progressions with clearly leveled success criteria so students can understand where they are on the learning progression, where they want to go next, and establish goals using higher levels of success criteria for how they plan to get there. Rubrics, checklists, and other tools to benchmark the quality of one's work are used while keeping three questions in mind: Where am I ? Where do I want to go on the learning continuum? How do I plan to get there? Our goal is to develop independence and agency and empower students to engage in conversation around growing and monitoring their learning. We define small group as a minimum of 1 and a maximum of 10 students. We chose this goal in regard to the Chancellor’s initiative “accelerating learning and instruction”. In order to accelerate learning and instruction we believe we must know our students and look at the whole child. To know your students means to be able to talk to who they are, what their individual needs are, what resources and materials best support their needs, what strategies best fit into their learning curves and how they are moving along the continuum. Small Group Instruction and the use of formative assessments to drive assessment capable learners, will continue to enable us:  To better monitor student needs and progress  To strengthen our use of data in meeting needs of individual students  To refine teacher pedagogy in relation to teachers developing a personal toolkit of skills and strategies to use on the run. This is inclusive of making instructional adjustments to provide students with teachable moments.  To strengthen the use of the Danielson Framework to benchmark effective and highly effective practices  To refine School / Parent Communication and grow a collaboration that bridges the gap between home and school.  To better inform and engage parents in regard to current practices and methods aligned to our reading, writing and math curriculum.  To maximize the use of our related service personnel and ENL Teacher through a Push In Model, and to evaluate on the run the support systems we have in place to make necessary modifications and adjustments to address the needs of students to ensure that coherence and common thread across the grades are evident and aligned to our reading, writing and math curriculum.  Develop reflective assessment capable learners who know how to use a variety of progressions and self-monitoring tools to set independent goals for achievement and create and implement successful plans for how they will grow themselves along the learning continuum. Our implementation of success criteria and formative assessments began by unpacking them and integrating them across content areas. We have integrated them in all of our curriculum maps and classroom practice. As evidenced in our School Quality Guide (data as delineated above) and 2018 State ELA assessment results, we continue to sustain student proficiency and make gains. We continue to Bridge the Achievement Gap with our English Language Learners (ELLs) and continue to make gains in reading and math . 2017 State ELA data showed this sub group at 17% proficiency while current 2018 ELA data demonstrates a 15% gain with 32% of our Ells meeting proficiency. 32% of our Ells demonstrated proficiency on the 2017 State Math exam while in comparison, 50% demonstrated proficiency on the 2018 State ELA exam...a whopping 18% increase in Ells meeting proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 20  Our school motto, "Believing in Children...Inspiring Young Minds" lives in the fabric of our school and is a testament to our inclusive environment where our goal is to provide "Equity and Access" for all learners. In response to data represented by the 2018 State ELA and Math exams, 2017-2018 Quality Snapshot, School Survey, and May 2018 Quality Review results, during the 2018-2019 school year, our impact teams will attend series of Professional Development sessions to enrich instructional strategies and construct a plethora of multiple entry points to address the needs of all students, inclusive of our new admits. They will then provide in-house PDs and turn-key information to their colleagues. Additionally, our staff and paraprofessionals are, and will continue to be immersed in extensive professional development on Danielson and the implementation of rigorous common core aligned instruction. Every facet of our professional lens for lifting the rigor of teaching and learning revolves around curriculum, practice, and best practices where the focus is always on improving teacher practice and heavily emphasized on the Effective and Highly Effective Domains. May 2018 Quality Review results indicated the following: Area of Focus: 2.2 Assessment-(Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels.) Although we are proud to have received a Proficient in this area of the Quality Review, we will leverage the feedback provided to us to work toward "Well Developed" practices in this area. The feedback provided to us in this area noted the following: ·Teachers consistently check for understanding using guided practice, mid-workshop interruptions, and exit tickets but there are limited opportunities for student self-assessment. ·Written feedback is limited to reading and writing tasks across grades and there was little evidence of similar feedback in other content areas. ·Actionable and meaningful feedback is not consistent and therefore does not provide a clear portrait of student mastery across contents. Inconsistency and a lack of opportunity for self-reflection limit students' awareness of their next learning steps. This year all of the professional learning will be focused on our Instructional Goal-Tailored Small Group Instruction and aligned to both the Chancellor's and District initiatives: "Equity and Access for All" with a focus on: Accelerating Learning and Instruction, Developing People, and Partnering with Communities. This work will include careful monitoring of student progress, the careful evaluation of all of the systems and structures we have in place to support student learning such as; Formative Assessments, RTI, Saturday Academy, After School Programs, small group instruction and AIS. Teachers are developed to better reflect deeply on impact on student achievement and next steps. As per Q.R. results,, emphasis will be placed on consistent "Actionable Feedback" to provide students with more opportunities for self-reflection in relation to their goals to accelerate learning. Moreover, in order to improve teacher pedagogy, actionable feedback to staff will also be consistent. As Administration provides staff with support, guidance, and tools to improve their pedagogy, the expectation will be observable transfer of methods shared in their classroom practice as evidenced by impact on their student's improvement. It is important to note that we received a score of "Proficient" in all areas of the Quality Review and are very proud to share our Area of Celebration: 3.4 High Expectations, which demonstrates we establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ● By June 2019 all teachers will have strengthened their use of data driven tailored small group instruction with an emphasis on consistent monitoring for understanding in grades 3-5 that will result in a 3% gain in student progress as measured by the State ELA Exam. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). *Administrators and content specific impact team leaders will provide targeted professional learning opportunities during designated Monday professional learning time. Teachers in grades K-5 Sept/18-June/19 (Monday PDs)-Monthly Administration Lead Impact Teams Mondays/Tuesdays Sept. 18-June 19 Teachers in grades K-5 Weekly *The Staff will engage in vertical conversations that are instructional and are aligned to the development of curriculum and best practices connected to our planning. Student data and work are always at the center of all team meetings. Research-based instructional programs, professional development, and systems and structures that will impact change: Teachers in grades K-5 Related Service personnel Sept./18-June/19 (Weekly during Monday PDs, Tuesday Inquiry days * Continue to use data to tailor small group instruction and meet the needs of individual students through professional development ENL Teachers Common Preps-at least 3X a week * Continue to refine teacher pedagogy by developing a personal toolkit of skills and strategies to use on the run * Continue to strengthen the use of the Danielson Framework to benchmark effective and highly effective practices with an emphasis on activities that promote high level thinking Administration Content specific impact team leaders Principal and Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principal, IEP Teacher. 2018-19 CEP 23  * Maximize the use of our related service personnel and ENL Teacher in Push-In Model. *Use of DOK and Blooms Taxonomy in planning to lift the rigor of instruction and foster high level thinking. Teachers in grades K-5 Sept 18-June 19-Daily Teachers in grades K-5 Administration and Impact team leaders Sept. 18-June 19 Teachers College staff developers 3X week on common preps and monthly PD cycles Sept 18-June 19 Monthly Tech week Administration Technology Impact team ENL team *Use of technology to lift and deepen understanding of content via a variety of hyperlinks to support the needs of individual student needs, as well as build background knowledge on topics not familiar to specific subgroups. Evidence of teacher practices that will provide students with conduits to multiple entry points are : Sept 18-June 19 Evidence of effective / highly effective planning Teachers in grades K-5 *Map curriculum to differentiate learning for IEP Students, ELL’s and High Performing Students-for example how data is analyzed and used for grouping will be evident in small group work and the modification of tasks. Fostering independence of students through a variety of strategies and the gradual release of responsibilities for example; provide with a menu of choice, encourage students to apply them independently and should be able to do so in any context. During this time the teacher will take the role of the facilitator as children are Common planning time-3X week Vertical Planning-Monthly Administration PPT and ENL Team Leaders TCRWP Staff Developer 2018-19 CEP 24 independently engaged with partners or in groups. This fosters children to learn to lean on what they have learned to do well to problem solve, it is a method of holding students accountable. Classroom Tools that anchor student learning, such as; work folders, rubrics, personal word walls, number lines, table tents and charts, mentor text, leveled book bins / baggies, content based literature, the use of graphic organizers, teacher exemplars. Evidence of articulation (related service personnel, IEP Teacher, School Psychologist, School Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, etc.), that promote “knowing their children” to move them along the learning continuum. Evidence of the application of methods to address multiple learning styles such as; tools that foster tactile learning, use of artifacts, videos. Spec.Ed Teachers ENL Teachers PPT Meetings (Once a month) SIT Meetings (Once a Month) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our goal for 2018-2019 will be to continue to work harder to build a positive relationship with our families so that they are partners in their child's learning. We will continue to strengthen our "Circle of Collaboration" between Administration, the School LeadershipTeam, the PTA, and our Families with the over arching goal of student achievement at the center of everything we do. The key personnel responsible for oversight of these initiatives will be building Administration, Parent Coordinator, SLT and PTA. 2018-19 CEP 25  We have an open door policy and provide parents with support to help their children at home, academically, physically and emotionally. Our parent coordinator is an integral part of the relationship between all stakeholders in the school. Open lines of communication is a major key in building the home-school connection.The following are some examples of how we incorporate parents into our school community: All families engage in September meet and Greet at Orientation where Administration and support staff share data, school wide initiatives/goals, protocols, policy, expectations, and each person's role as they support both children and families. All families are provided with a PS 38 Family Handbook which delineates all of the above and more and all information is shared and posted on our school website: www.ps38si.org To better meet the needs of our diverse and multilingual families, our website has a drop-down language feature where they can select their language and everything will automatically convert to it. We also use our phone blast system to share important information and events via voice messaging.  Monthly Parents as Learning Partners (Each month covers a different subject area)  Curriculum Conferences-September 2018  TCRWP provides workshops for parents to inform them about curriculum that will be covered in their school. Attendees will then turn-key this information to other parents at a parent workshop or PTA meeting.-November 2018  Progress Reports to communicate student academic performance/behavioral concerns- Ongoing as needed from September 2018-June 2019  Monthly Parent Workshops based on needs assessments. This data is collected from parent surveys prepared by the school in November 2018..  ENL and Spec. Ed. Team provide workshops to help parents in supporting their children's academic needs  Weekly Parent/Teacher Engagement Meetings to celebrate achievements and address concerns regarding student performance.  Citizen and Student of the Month celebrations at Monthly PTA meetings  Grade Assemblies for parents to learn units of study children are learning-Each month is a different assembly/grade with a different theme/focus. QR Area of Celebration: 3.4 High Expectations Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations  Monthly Newsletters for families in each grade. The newsletters are prepared by teachers and inform parents about the units of study and the rigorous practices that will take place during that period.  Monthly Principal newsletters  Grades 3-5 will host "Getting Ready for State Test" workshops in the spring to share how we integrate skills and strategies into our curriculum throughout the year and then engage students in a test Prep genre unit of study in Spring before the tests. The workshop provides families with strategies for home support. These are just some of the ways we engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. . “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated Section 5A Part IV A Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in 2018-19 CEP 27  SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are 2018-19 CEP 28  included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the 2018-19 CEP 29  consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Per Session Activities in Support of Action Plans Program Title I Ready I Ready Saturday Academy Saturday Academy Saturday Academy Teacher (1) Supervisor (1) Para (1) Teacher (4) Supervisor (1) Hours Per Week # of Weeks Total TotaHourl s Funding Source 2 15 30 2 15 30 $1,380 Tax Levy $1,419 Tax Levy 4 12 48 $1,382 Tax Levy 4 12 192 $8,832 Tax Levy 4 12 48 $2,271 Tax Levy 2018-19 CEP 30 4 16 186 $12,365 Title III 4 20 80 $3,680 Tax Levy 1 39 39 $1,844 Tax Levy Teacher (4) Teachers (4) Supervisor Title III Inquiry Team Inquiry Team Per Diem Activities in Support of Action Plans Program Title # of Days Total Funding Source Title 40 I $7,358 Teacher’s College PD Per Diem Substitutes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. TTiittX lle e II TTiatX X x lLe eI Title III, TitX le I2018-19 CEP 31 TSIA W, P IImIm, iPPgaarrrat t nA A t 21st Cent ury Grant SIG /SIF OthPeTrIA (n FTK X uianx ndLd eed vy) vy C X 4E Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid Point Checks include but are not limited to: ***February Mid-Year checkpoints consist of Monitoring for Results reading data, Informational Writing Data, Mid-Year TCRWP MOSL data. We will extract data for the subgroups targeted to better monitor for progress (SWDs, Ells) ***This year we will add the sub group of boys and hispanics as 2018 demonstrated these subgroups score significantly lower in both ELA and Math. 2018-19 CEP 32  Data Impact Team will analyze teacher data as a building to create graphs of school wide performance to compare proficiency levels. This will delineate a bird's eye view of the building and data trends by grade. Teachers will analyze mid-year data to take stock of student progress/sub group progress, and make adjustments accordingly as they plan next steps. Mid Year check points and data will be shared, analyzed and discussed at School Leadership Team Meetings in relation to our CEP Goals. Although we have our mid-year checkpoints, it is important to note that data collection and monitoring occurs in consistent cycles as delineated below to better compare and measure progress and to track trends and patterns in student performance. ● TCRWP Running Record/MOSL Assessments (quarterly) ● On The Go Assessments and conference notes-Daily ● RTI Data (Once a Month) ● Student Projects and tasks that are bench marked to CCSS aligned rubrics (Sept. and February) ● Informational Writing continuum: Monitor lowest 1/3 in each class in student performance on ELA On-Demand Informational Writing Tasks (4 times a year) ● Authentic student work samples aligned to performance indicators and rubrics (beginning, middle, and end of each unit of study) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will use TCRWP running record assessments as our MOSL in ELA in grades K-5. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. PS 38 establishes a culture where students feel safe, are challenged to grow, and are supported to meet high expectations. Data in our quality snapshot demonstrates that 84% of our teachers and families responded positively to questions about supportive environment. 93% of our teachers feel our environment is safe and that adults at the school teach students how to advocate for themselves . In the area of personal attention and support, particularly safety, NYC survey results demonstrate a 93% positive response rate which exceeds the District by 3% and the City by 4%. 2018 May Quality Review Results demonstrate a score of 3.50-"proficient" in the area of how safe and inclusive PS 38 is while supporting social emotional growth. This demonstrates we have a safe and inclusive school culture which provides access for all learners, incorporates social emotional learning, attendance, and development for academic success. We continue to demonstrate movement of Students with disabilities (SWD) to less restrictive environments as evidenced by our metric score of 3.76 on the 2017-2018 School Quality Snapshot. We also received a score of 4.99, a "well developed" in communicating high expectations while supporting those expectations for academic excellence. This is inclusive of support for families in their understanding of these expectations for college/career readiness. In the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to foster a safe and supportive environment that allows children to learn and excel at the highest levels. Our goal is to provide our students with a safe environment throughout the school day as it will ensure desired outcomes in their academic performance. Fostering a safe community will lead to independent student body that will be empowered to reach their full academic potential. Each day begins with our Respect For All Mantra to foster character development and social emotional wellness following our morning Pledge over the public address system: 2018-19 CEP 34  Our school motto, "Believing in Children...Inspiring Young Minds" lives in the fabric of our school and is a testament to our inclusive environment where our goal is to provide "Equity and Access" for all learners. To further promote development of the "Whole Child" teachers will continue to use "Stanford Harmony, Buddy-up" strategies to promote a school culture and good citizenship. We will host assemblies on a variety of safety and supportive environment topics such as, but not limited to: bullying, character development, social media awareness, acceptance, diversity, etc. Families will be an integral part of this development and partners in learning with their child. Monthly Parents as Learning Partners Days will be one way we foster family awareness of curriculum and support for their children. During these events teachers open their classroom doors to parents and parents have the opportunity to get involved in their students' learning. This type of engagement promotes the partnership that ensures student progress/achievement. 2018-19 CEP 35  2. A priority area for improvement will be Developing Young Leaders among our student population. May 2018 Quality Review feedback suggested to further grow our school culture, students could be even more involved in leadership roles in which they learn to work collectively in teams on ideas initiated by student body to further improve our school community. Word are very powerful and can bring about positive change if used in positive ways for the greater good. As active and responsible citizens of the PS 38 community students will learn to work collectively to bring about positive change. This will foster character development as they will one day become active members of society. Throughout the school year, students will be encouraged to partake in activities and work on teams that promote positive behavior toward their peers, adults and most importantly their education. This process will empower them and help them become active members of our school community. Social Emotional Development and positive reinforcement/character building will lead to greater participation and academic press as students develop self confidence to take risks and put their best foot forward. 3. Parent Engagement Tuesdays and whole school workshops will address common concerns on topics such as behavior plans, IEPs, Discipline Code, Supports for Ells and multilingual learners and their families,etc.. All policies and protocols will be shared at a variety of forums such as workshops, PTA meetings, leadership meetings, via letter and are posted in our school handbook and online on our school website. We will host assemblies on a variety of safety and supportive environment topics such as, but not limited to: bullying, character development, social media awareness, acceptance, diversity, etc. Support staff will work closely with families and students to provide supports and resources which can be tailored based on need. They will work collaboratively with administration and our parent Coordinator and will lean on community resources to support these initiatives. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school-wide efforts to encourage collaboration through classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers and peers, 40% of our students in grades K-5 will meet or exceed proficiency levels in reading, as measured by the June 2019 MOSL assessments/Running Records. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will continue to use the "Stanford Harmony, Buddy-up" strategies to promote a school culture and good citizenship. Teachers in grades K-5 Teachers will provide Respect for All sessions All Students Daily starting Sept/2018-Ending June/2019 starting Sept/2018-Ending Administration Guidance counselor Administration Teachers June/2019 Parent Coordinator SAT Parent Engagement Tuesdays - Whole school workshops to address common concerns on topics such as behavior plans. Parents/Guardians Classroom Teachers All policies and protocols will be shared at a variety of forums such as workshops, PTA meetings, leadership meetings, via letter and are posted in our school handbook and online on our school website. We will host assemblies on a variety of safety and supportive environment topics such as, but not limited to: bullying, character development, social media awareness, acceptance, diversity, etc. Parents as Learning Partners- Teachers open their classroom doors to parents. The parents have the opportunity to get involved in their students' learning. This type of engagement starting Sept/2018-Ending ENL teachers Parent Coordinator June/2019 IEP Teacher SAT Personnel Guests Speakers PTA Members BRT Team, district Liaisons, CBOs 10/18 Administration 2018-19 CEP 37  promotes the partnership that ensures student progress/achievement. Parents and students Family Nights (Cultural Cromwell Café, Teddy Bear Night, PTA Nights, Safety Meetings, etc.) We will also continue to lean on CEC representatives to provide information sessions on social media awareness. Parents Students Teachers We have staff trained in De-escalation, TCIS, and other safety protocols and methods to support children and families in crisis. We also have partnerships with Staten Island Mental Health and other support organizations and our SAT/SIT Team works diligently with families. Developing Young Leaders-Throughout the school year, students will be encouraged to partake in activities and work on teams that promote positive behavior toward their peers, adults and most importantly their education. This process will empower them and help them become active members of our school community. Social Emotional Development and positive reinforcement/character building will lead to greater participation and academic press as students develop self confidence to take risks and put their best foot forward. Students 11/18 Teachers 12/18 1/19 2/19 3/19 4/19 5/19 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator PTA Guidance Councelor School Social Worker School Psychologist Administration , SAT Team and staff Beginning Sept 18-June 19 2018-19 CEP 38  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Sept 18: Meet and Greet Night: Overview of our goals and visions and every member of our instructional and school support team will share their role in the school related to our vision to support families in their children's learning. (Administration and Panel of support staff inclusive of PC, SAT Team, etc) Sept 2018-ENL Orientation for Families of ELLs-led by ENL teachers Sept 18-June 19: Parents as learning partner days: Once a month parents will join their children in the classroom for a shared instructional experience learning side by side. Each session has a particular instructional focus and administration debriefs with families afterward.The key personnel responsible for oversight will be the administration, parent coordinator, and the impact team of the specific content area. Monthly PTA meetings where we share protocol, policy, curriculum, and bring in guest speakers.-PC and PTA with Families and Admin) Tuesday weekly family Engagement student progress meetings.-(Parents and Teachers) Monthly parent workshops driven by parent survey results (some in cycles)-Provided by PTA, Staff September 18-June 19-Series of ENL support workshops which will take place throughout the year as needed. Round Table meetings with School Assessment Team to discuss students' IEP Goals, and progress related to such, etc.-SAT Team and Teachers) Series of workshops will be implemented to support families of students with IEPs throughout the year from October 2018-May 2019Led by School Assessment Team, special ed teachers, Latianna Wilson (Social Emotional Central Support) January 2019: Where are we now?-Worshop to share current data, glows, grows, and plans of action-Admin, impact Team Leaders, data specialists May 2019- Celebration of 2018-2019 Glows and 2019-2020 Grows- Forum led by Admin, select lead staff and parents Monthly student of the month and citizen of the month celebrations at PTA meetings-Beginning September 2018 and ongoing to June 2019 Parent Volunteer program-facilitated by PTA for specific events such as plant sale, book sale, carnival night, and daily drop and go-Beginning September 2018 and ongoing to June 2019 School Leadership Team Learning Walks: Using the Q.R sub-indicators to guide our lens with a focus on select sub indicators-led by administration in winter18 and spring 19 2018 Winter Door Decorating Contest-Using a performance rubric parents judje and select winners during a walkthrough 2018-19 CEP 39  Spring '19 Science Fair/Projects: Scored by science teacher and a panel of parents using a rubric Technology workshops led by STEM impact team October 18-June 19- Ongoing Series of Family Engagement workshops for pre-kindergarten families-Led by teachers and Shameeka Gannon-Pre-K social worker and Zina Pasquale Instructional Support. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Section 5B Part IV A Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, 2018-19 CEP 40  schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. TTTitiiltte TllTIITie e iI, atIItIlx IIl mX X e X X L, Ie mI eI , ivSPTPgWy aA arP rrat t nA A t 21st Cent ury Grant SIG /SIF OthPeTrIA (n FTK X uianx ndLd eed vy) C X 4E Per Session Activities in Support of Action Plans 2018-19 CEP 41 Hours Per Week # of Weeks Total TotaHourl s Funding Source 2 15 30 2 15 30 $1,380 Tax Levy $1,419 Tax Levy 4 12 48 $1,382 Tax Levy 4 12 192 $8,832 Tax Levy 4 12 48 $2,271 Tax Levy 4 16 186 $12,365 Title III 4 20 80 $3,680 Tax Levy 1 39 39 $1,844 Tax Levy Program Title I Ready I Ready Saturday Academy Saturday Academy Saturday Academy Title III Inquiry Team Inquiry Team Teacher (1) Supervisor (1) Para (1) Teacher (4) Supervisor (1) Teacher (4) Teachers (4) Supervisor Per Diem Activities in Support of Action Plans Program Title # of Days Total Funding Source 40 $7,358 Title I Teacher’s College PD Per Diem Substitutes 2018-19 CEP 42  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In 2018-2019 we will provide students with a safe and supportive environment which will result in 50% of our students in grades K-5 meeting or exceeding the proficiency levels in reading. Mid Point Checks include but are not limited to: ***February Mid-Year checkpoints consist of Monitoring for Results reading data, Informational Writing Data, Mid-Year TCRWP MOSL data. We will extract data for the subgroups targeted to better monitor for progress (SWDs, Ells) Data Impact Team will analyze teacher data as a building to create graphs of school wide performance to compare proficiency levels. This will delineate a bird's eye view of the building and data trends by grade. Teachers will analyze mid-year data to take stock of student progress/sub group progress, and make adjustments accordingly as they plan next steps. Mid Year check points and data will be shared, analyzed and discussed at School Leadership Team Meetings in relation to our CEP Goals. Although we have our mid-year checkpoints, it is important to note that data collection and monitoring occurs in consistent cycles as delineated below to better compare and measure progress and to track trends and patterns in student performance. ● TCRWP Running Record/MOSL Assessments (quarterly) ● On The Go Assessments and conference notes-Daily ● RTI Data (Once a Month) ● Student Projects and tasks that are bench marked to CCSS aligned rubrics (Sept. and February) ● Informational Writing continuum: Monitor lowest 1/3 in each class in student performance on ELA On-Demand Informational Writing Tasks (4 times a year) ● Authentic student work samples aligned to performance indicators and rubrics (beginning, middle, and end of each unit of study) 2018-19 CEP 43  In addition to mid-year benchmarks, there are many other ways we take the pulse of student learning and measure progress throughout the year: Through the use of parent and teacher surveys we will canvas and take stock of our progress in this area and make necessary adjustment to the area of supporting environment. We want our students to feel safe and supported and want them to take risks as they learn. Students will learn to be assessment capable learners through the use of progressions, rubrics, and checklists. Through student goal setting they will learn to monitor and grow their own learning along the learning continuum. Student progress will be monitored with TCRWP data collected and input into the Teachers College Assessment Pro data base Quarterly: in September, November, March, and May, and will be used to monitor student achievement. Data will also be monitored for all before and after school intervention/enrichment programs to provide students the extra push they need in foundational skills. Programs vary in length and time dependent on budget. The length of a program will determine how often data is collected and monitored however, this will be done regularly and consistently. In support of teachers, they will be provided ample collaborative inquiry time to analyze data and plan for targeted small group instruction. We have supportive, transparent parent communication and parents will be engaged in one to one student progress meetings on Inquiry Tuesdays to keep them abreast of their child's strengths and areas of need, share the teacher's plan of action, and share ideas for how they can support them at home. The mid-year assessment to determine the school's progress will be conducted in February by using TCRWP Running Records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCRWP Running records will measure student proficiency as a result of impactful development through an environment which supports the "Whole Child" both socially, emotionally, and academically. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PS 38 we are a Professional Learning Community and we take pride in the capacity we have built through the years through state of the art professional development. We are a Columbia Teachers College Reading and Writing Project School and have partnered with Teacher's College for over 14 years. We have an in-house staff developer that differentiates professional development to grades K-5. All PD is aligned to our Instructional Focus and driven by data. As delineated in below and in our action plan teachers receive an abundance of professional development to suit their needs both in and out of house. We have Impact teams comprised of teachers and administration that attend all District training on the use of formative assessments to develop assessment capable learners. These teachers provide turn-key training to their colleagues to strengthen our pedagogy as a collaborative learning community. 2018-2019 School Wide Instructional Focus: “Tailored small group instruction with an emphasis on consistent monitoring for understanding across all content areas through the use of on-going summative and formative assessments and actionable feedback.” We believe that:   If we ground our work in the Common Core State Standards and the Danielson Framework, closely monitoring students’ performance and progress to target their needs, then we can move all students along the learning continuum through tailored instruction. If we implement Formative Assessments with clear learning intentions, success criteria, and actionable feedback, then students will successfully and independently engage in goal setting and self-monitoring to grow themselves as learners According to 2016-2017 state-wide assessment results, our students with disabilities did not make anticipated gains, especially students in self-contained settings. We concluded that there had to be a stronger collaboration amongst teachers to address the matter. Our findings have indicated that while we have begun to systematically acquire more common planning and vertical conversations, there is still a need for greater collaboration and training to support special education teachers to ensure academic progress for our SWDs. As a result in 2017-2018 we closely monitored data for this subgroup and teachers engaged in focused Special Education PD to support this initiative. This PD was led by our Spec Ed Liaison who attended District PD and our IEP teacher. As a result of this focused inquiry work 2018 State Math and 2018 State ELA data each demonstrates a 1% gain in proficiency for Students With Disabilities (SWDs). Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 45  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school-wide efforts to encourage teacher commitment to the success and improvement of their classrooms and school, 90% of SWD in grades K-5 will move two reading levels, as measured by the June 2019 MOSL assessments (Running Records). 2018-19 CEP 46  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ELA impact team will promote the implementation of the CCLS and the instructional shifts during: All Teachers Sept 18 June 19 Common prep periods, across each and every grade level, at least 4 times per week. This time will be used for planning, looking at student work, preparing materials and resources and articulation. Vertical planning teams work together to gear scaffolded learning across 2 grade bands. Monthly Instructional Team meetings to discuss current teaching trends, instructional concerns, to survey professional development needs. PD Mondays, Inquiry Tuesdays throughout the school year. Grade teams 4X week Monthly Teachers, Lead teachers, Impact Team, staff developers, administration Teachers and Admin Principal and cabinet 2018-19 CEP 47  Special education teachers will review SWD's IEPs to ensure that the annual goals are addressed and modifications are respected. They will collaborate with service providers to discuss strategies to meet the needs of their students. The School Assessment team will meet continuously to discuss various strategies to meet the needs of our SWD The School Leadership Team will meet one time per month to review and analyze data, and to revise school policies, and discuss nuances and ideas aligned to our CEP goals and student achievement. Grade and content area teacher representatives and admin Special education teachers, As per mandates Service providers, SWD SAT and Admin Monthly SLT Members/Teacher and Parent representatives 9/18 10/18 IEP teacher, Teachers. Parents Administration, School Assessment Team Admin and Chairperson with SLT cabinet 2018-19 CEP 48  11/18 12/18 1/19 2/19 3/19 4/19 5/19 6/19 Instructional Programs: Early Grade Morning Reading Tutorial K-2, Inclusive of SWD, three times a week for 12 weeks from 7 a.m. - 8:15 a.m. K-2 students in lowest 1/3 October 18 through January 19 Administration IEP Teacher Classroom teachers Students grades 3-5 December 18 thru April 19 Grade teachers and Admin Saturday Test Prep Academy: 11 week test prep program Mentoring Minds- ELA supplemental program for grades 3-5. The instruction is aligned to CCSS Students grades 3-5 Reading Eggs Program; Year round program for students in grades K-2. students use the program at home and in school. November 2018-June 2019 Teachers grades 3-5 October 2018-June 2019 Weekly Teachers K-2 2018-19 CEP 49  I-Ready ELA and Math Technology Morning Math AIS for lowest 1/3 Students in K-2 and in self-contained settings 2X a week Teachers Teachers and admin Students in grades 3-5 (Gen Ed. and SWD) Grades K-5 2 days a week Response to Intervention: The SIT Team will have monthly meetings to discuss SWD present performances and design action plans to support their needs. They will share the outcomes with classroom teachers. Classroom Teachers Sept 2017-June 2018 School Assessment team SWD in grades K-5 IEP teacher The following are some examples of structures that support distributive leadership: *Differentiated professional development for staff based on needs assessment and determined by observations and teacher surveys. All Teachers Parents Students *The pairing of highly effective instructional mentors for new staff. Mentoring techniques include but are not limited to; inter-visitation, peer mentoring, vertical planning, sharing of best practices and ongoing collaboration and feedback from mentors and administrators. It is a to-with-and by initiative. *The unpacking of Danielson, reflecting on practice with an emphasis on effective and highly effective domains will enforce our circle of collaboration inclusive of Sept 2017-June 2018 Administrators Administration, Grade leaders, TC Staff developers, Teacher Mentors 2018-19 CEP 50  Administration, PTA, Leadership Team, and Teachers working with Families with student achievement as our goal. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our goal for 2018-2019 will be to continue to work harder to build a positive relationship with our families so that they are partners in their child's learning. In the beginning of the school year, the parents will receive a survey that contains a questionnaire on desired parent workshops they would prefer to attend. Our PPT and School Assessment team provides workshop ideas that are related to SWD. The following are some examples of how we incorporate parents into our school community:  Informational workshops related to IEPs provided by the School Assessment Team and Special Education Teachers  Monthly Parents as Learning Partners (Each month covers a different subject area)  Curriculum Conferences   Parent Workshops based on needs assessments. This data is collected from parent surveys prepared by the IEP Progress Reports to communicate student academic performance/behavioral concerns school.  Weekly Parent/Teacher Engagement Meetings to address concerns regarding student performance or celebrate student growth  Grade Assemblies for parents to learn units of study children are learning  Monthly Newsletters for families in each grade. The newsletters are prepared by teachers and inform parents about the units of study. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Section 5C Part IV A Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and 2018-19 CEP 51  implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the 2018-19 CEP 52  flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or 2018-19 CEP 53  local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the 2018-19 CEP 54  Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for FY ’17 school allocation amounts) school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, page # references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. CCololuumm2018-19 CEP 55  n A n B Verify with an (X) Page # Reference(s) Section 5E Strong Family Community Ties (all parts regarding to parent inTitle I Part A (Basic) Federal $216,605 X 2018-19 CEP 56  volvement) Section 8 Part 4a Section 5A, 5B and 5C p.13, 38, throughout CEP SectioTitle II, Part A Federal $66,354 X Title III, Part A Federal $12,366 X 2018-19 CEP 57  n 5C part 4b Section 5D part 4b Section 5E part 4a Title III, Immigrant Federal N.A. AIDP - $18,794 CFE - $42,910 X $420,215 Tax Levy (FSF) LOCAL Pre K- School Support SuppThroughout the whole 2018-19 CEP 58  lement- $147,350 Tax Levy - $3,203,834 document Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. TTTitiiltte TllTIIiTe e iI, taIIt Ilx IIl mX X e X X L, e ImI e , I iSvPTPgWy A aarP rrat t nA A t C4X E 21st Cen tu ry Grant SI G/SIF OthPeTrIA (n FTKX uain x ndLd eed vy) 2018-19 CEP 59  Per Session Activities in Support of Action Plans Hours Per Week # of Weeks Total TotaHourl s Funding Source 2 15 30 2 15 30 $1,380 Tax Levy $1,419 Tax Levy 4 12 48 $1,382 Tax Levy 4 12 192 $8,832 Tax Levy 4 12 48 $2,271 Tax Levy 4 16 186 $12,365 Title III 4 20 80 $3,680 Tax Levy 1 39 39 $1,844 Tax Levy Program Title I Ready I Ready Saturday Academy Saturday Academy Saturday Academy Title III Inquiry Team Inquiry Team Teacher (1) Supervisor (1) Para (1) Teacher (4) Supervisor (1) Teacher (4) Teachers (4) Supervisor Per Diem Activities in Support of Action Plans Program Title # of Days Total Funding Source Teacher’s College PD Per Diem Subs40 $7,358 Title I 2018-19 CEP 60 titutes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid Point Checks include but are not limited to: ***February Mid-Year checkpoints consist of Monitoring for Results reading data, Informational Writing Data, Mid-Year TCRWP MOSL data. We will extract data for the SWDs targeted to better monitor for progress Data Impact Team will analyze teacher data as a building to create graphs of school wide performance to compare proficiency levels. This will delineate a bird's eye view of the building and data trends by grade. Teachers will analyze mid-year data to take stock of student progress/sub group progress, and make adjustments accordingly as they plan next steps. Mid Year check points and data will be shared, analyzed and discussed at School Leadership Team Meetings in relation to our CEP Goals. Although we have our mid-year checkpoints, it is important to note that data collection and monitoring occurs in consistent cycles as delineated below to better compare and measure progress and to track trends and patterns in student performance. ● TCRWP Running Record/MOSL Assessments (quarterly) ● On The Go Assessments and conference notes-Daily ● RTI Data (Once a Month) ● Student Projects and tasks that are bench marked to CCSS aligned rubrics (Sept. and February) 2018-19 CEP 61  ● Informational Writing continuum: Monitor lowest 1/3 in each class in student performance on ELA On-Demand Informational Writing Tasks (4 times a year) ● Authentic student work samples aligned to performance indicators and rubrics (beginning, middle, and end of each unit of study) In addition to mid-year benchmarks, there are many other ways we take the pulse of student learning and measure progress throughout the year: Through the use of parent and teacher surveys we will canvas and take stock of our progress in this area and make necessary adjustment to the area of supporting environment. We want our students to feel safe and supported and want them to take risks as they learn. Students will learn to be assessment capable learners through the use of progressions, rubrics, and checklists. Through student goal setting they will learn to monitor and grow their own learning along the learning continuum. SWD Student progress will be monitored with TCRWP data collected and input into the Teachers College Assessment Pro data base Quarterly: in September, November, March, and May, and will be used to monitor student achievement. Data will also be monitored for all before and after school intervention/enrichment programs to provide students the extra push they need in foundational skills. Programs vary in length and time dependent on budget. The length of a program will determine how often data is collected and monitored however, this will be done regularly and consistently. In support of teachers, they will be provided ample collaborative inquiry time to analyze data and plan for targeted small group instruction. We have supportive, transparent parent communication and parents will be engaged in one to one student progress meetings on Inquiry Tuesdays to keep them abreast of their child's strengths and areas of need, share the teacher's plan of action, and share ideas for how they can support them at home. The mid-year assessment to determine the school's progress will be conducted in February by using TCRWP Running Records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. February TCRWP running records will be the measure that is used to assess student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 62  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. School Leadership inspires the community with a clear instructional vision and effectively distributes leadership to realize this vision. Our 2017-2018 Quality Snapshot demonstrates that 84% of our school community responded positively to questions about school leadership on the Annual School Survey. In the area of Instructional Leadership, we received a 95% positive response rate and exceeded target in the areas of Program Coherence and Principal Instructional Leadership. In comparison we superseded the District as we demonstrated + 3% and we superseded the City by + 7%. 100% of teachers feel that the Principal communicates a clear vision for the school which supersedes the city average by + .10% and 95% of our parents feel that the Principal works to create a sense of community in the school. 2. Assessment is the nucleus of everything we do at P.S. 38. All instructional / administrative and operational decisions are data driven. We look at all qualitative and quantitative data to address all needs of the school community. Although we are proud to have received a Proficient in this area of the Quality Review, we will leverage the feedback provided to us to work toward "Well Developed" practices in this area. The feedback provided to us in this area noted the following: ·Teachers consistently check for understanding using guided practice, mid-workshop interruptions, and exit tickets but there are limited opportunities for student self-assessment. ·Written feedback is limited to reading and writing tasks across grades and there was little evidence of similar feedback in other content areas. ·Actionable and meaningful feedback is not consistent and therefore does not provide a clear portrait of student mastery across contents. Inconsistency and a lack of opportunity for self-reflection limit students' awareness of their next learning steps. This year all of the professional learning will be focused on our Instructional Goal-Tailored Small Group Instruction and aligned to both the Chancellor's and District initiatives: "Equity and Access for All" with a focus on: Accelerating Learning and Instruction, Developing People, and Partnering with Communities. This work will include careful monitoring of student progress, the careful evaluation of all of the systems and structures we have in place to support student learning such as; Formative Assessments, RTI, Saturday Academy, After School Programs, small group 2018-19 CEP 63  instruction and AIS. Teachers are developed to better reflect deeply on impact on student achievement and next steps. As per Q.R. results,, emphasis will be placed on consistent "Actionable Feedback" to provide students with more opportunities for self-reflection in relation to their goals to accelerate learning. Moreover, in order to improve teacher pedagogy, actionable feedback to staff will also be consistent. As Administration provides staff with support, guidance, and tools to improve their pedagogy, the expectation will be observable transfer of methods shared in their classroom practice as evidenced by impact on their student's improvement. It is important to note that we received a score of "Proficient" in all areas of the Quality Review and are very proud to share our Area of Celebration: 3.4 High Expectations, which demonstrates we establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations Our inquiry team has concluded that as our students make significant gains in ELA. Mathematics is an area that continue to focus on. Based on this data, there is a need for continued support of our pedagogy in a variety of mediums., especially in mathematics. Therefore we will continue to support teachers and build capacity around their needs.The leadership believes that the school-wide culture and the way teachers view math plays an important role in our students' present performance in mathematics. As this is a district-wide initiative, the school leaders will continue to support teachers in this area by changing the culture on how math is viewed and encourage them to change their perception of mathematics that will ensure gains in students' performance. We will work with NTN math staff developers to lift the rigor of our practice and develop conceptual understanding through the use of SOLVE, number talks and problem solving. This year we also implemented Algebra for All in 5th grade to set a foundation for middle school math. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of effective school leadership, 40% of our students in grades K-5 will meet or exceed proficiency levels in mathematics, as measured by the June 2019 Go Math End-of-the-Year assessments. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Attend NTN (National Training Network) PDs provided by the FSC School leader, Math Impact Team TBA (Depending on District) administration, staff developers, District supports Teachers in grades K-5 Teachers in grades K-5 Teachers in grades K-5 Sept. 18, January 18, June 19 Administration Math Impact Team Administration Sept. 18, January 19, June 19  Math impact team will turn key information to staff during Monday PDs. As we build capacity, teachers will turn-key new information to their colleagues and share best practices to make adjustments in their practice through focused inquiry work.  Teachers will receive ongoing professional development aligned to our school wide focus and the use of formative assessments to develop reflective independent assessment capable learners who use a variety of tools to grow themselves along a learning continuum. 2018-19 CEP 65   School-Wide Goal: Emphasis on using data to drive small group instruction and consistent monitoring for understanding.  Provide teachers with many professional resources  In-house Inter-visitations and establishments of lab sites to observe best practices. We will continue to empower our teachers to refine their pedagogy through sharing best practices and making adjustments to their own instruction.  Vertical planning to scaffold learning across grades  Grade level inquiry meetings always with student work at the center.  PD in Response to Intervention and the use of School Assessment team to support teacher's practice.  Continuous PD and unpacking of the Danielson Framework for Teaching and Learning. Teachers use this to reflect on their pedagogy and drive their practice towards the effective and highly effective areas of the framework.  On going actionable feedback is provided to teachers stating glows and grows.  Using the Depth of Knowledge to design plans that push student thinking and promote problem solving at high strategic levels. Focused inquiry work reflecting specific targeted intervention groups.   Monthly Pupil Progress Team meetings to discuss students at risk and modify plans of action for Response to Intervention for our SWD and ELLs. Teachers RTI  We will engage our Leadership team in learning walks aligned to quality review indicators to evaluate effectiveness of our programs, and brainstorm ideas for Sept. 18, January 19, June 19 Administration Math Impact Team Lead Teachers, Impact Team, SAT/SIT ENL Team Administration 2018-19 CEP 66 adjustments for continued improvement and student achievement.  Incorporate Help-Math and Math-seeds as supplemental programs to support students with Tiered, Technology infused instruction.  Mentoring Minds for Grades 3-5- Supplemental program aligned to CCSS Help-Math Students in 3-5 Math Seeds- Students in K-2 Sept 18-June 19-Monthly SAt Team, Admin December 2018 and spring 2019 SLT parent and staff members Administration Classroom Teachers Administration Mentoring Minds- Every Friday from 2018-19 CEP 67  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept.2018-June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our goal for 2018-2019 will be to continue to work harder to build a positive relationship with our families so that they are partners in their child's learning. We have an open door policy and provide parents with support to help their children at home, academically, physically and emotionally. Our parent coordinator is an integral part of the relationship between all stakeholders in the school. The following are some examples of how we incorporate parents into our school community:  Monthly Parents as Learning Partners (Each month covers a different subject area)  Curriculum Conferences  Progress Reports to communicate student academic performance/behavioral concerns  Parent Workshops based on needs assessments. This data is collected from parent surveys prepared by the school.  Weekly Parent/Teacher Engagement Meetings to address concerns regarding student performance or celebrate student growth  Cromwell Café to celebrate cultural diversity  Grade Assemblies for parents to learn units of study children are learning  Annual Earth Day- Gardening with parents  Celebrating the Student and Citizen of the Month.  Monthly Newsletters for families in each grade. The newsletters are prepared by teachers and inform parents about the units of study Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, 2018-19 CEP 68  instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwid2018-19 CEP 69  e Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidat2018-19 CEP 70  ed in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (RefPlace an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the inte2018-19 CEP 71  er to Galaxy for FY ’16 school allocation amounts) nt and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, page # references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. CCololuummn n A B Verify Page # 2018-19 CEP 72  with an (X) Reference(s) Section 5E Strong Family Community Ties Section 8 Part 4a Section 5A, 5B anTitle I Part A (Basic) Federal $216, 605 X Title II, Part A Federal $66,354 X 2018-19 CEP 73  Title III, Part A Federal $12,366 X d 5C p.13, 38, throughout CEP Section 5C part 4b Section 5D part 4b Section 5E p2018-19 CEP 74  art 4a Title III, Immigrant Federal N.A. AIDP - $18,794 CFE - $42,910 $420,215 $147,350 $3,203,834 Pre K- Tax Levy (FSF) LOCAL School Support Supplement- Tax Levy - X Throughout the whole document Per Session Activities in Support of Action Plans Hours Per Week # of Weeks Total TotaHourl s Funding Source 2 15 30 2 15 30 $1,380 Tax Levy $1,419 Tax Levy 4 12 48 $1,382 Tax Levy Program Title Teacher (1) Supervisor (1) Para (1) I Ready I Ready Saturday Academy 2018-19 CEP 75  Saturday Academy Saturday Academy Title III Inquiry Team Inquiry Team Teacher (4) Supervisor (1) Teacher (4) Teachers (4) Supervisor 4 12 192 $8,832 Tax Levy 4 12 48 $2,271 Tax Levy 4 16 186 $12,365 Title III 4 20 80 $3,680 Tax Levy 1 39 39 $1,844 Tax Levy Per Diem Activities in Support of Action Plans Program Title # of Days Total Funding Source 40 $7,358 Title I Teacher’s College PD Per Diem Substitutes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Year Math Progression Data compared to Beginning of the year Math Progression data will be used to measure student progress aligned to the goal 2018-19 CEP 76  Teacher Teams will begin their analysis and planning for instruction “beginning with the end in mind.” Teachers will conduct items analysis to identify the specific needs of their students and in an on-going manner, adjust their instruction to address those needs. Each Teacher Team will collaborate to adjust the curricular needs across the grade. Individual classroom teachers will then further modify and differentiate that instruction, based on the needs of that specific classroom (ICT planning, ELL planning, General Education planning). In addition, other school Teams will contribute by providing additional feedback, resources, tools, strategies, etc. to continue to grow the students academically and behaviorally, to improve and promote overall student achievement through highly-effective instruction. Post assessments will be used to see how modifications and adjustments provided students with the support they needed to perform well. This will be an ongoing process. Data will also be monitored for all before and after school intervention/enrichment programs to provide students the extra push they need in foundational skills. Programs vary in length and time dependent on budget. The length of a program will determine how often data is collected and monitored however, this will be done regularly and consistently. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. BOY, MOY, and EOY math progression data will be used to assess student progress in math. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 77  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Data demonstrates 97% positive feedback from our families in the area of outreach to parents. We supersede the District-wide average by +1% and the Citywide average by +2%. This is a testament of hard work and dedication of our collaboration as a professional learning community who consistently applies methodologies acquired from current state of the art professional development with our Partners with Families...Partners in Learning initiative. We are life long learners and will continue to develop and grow our pedagogy for the betterment of our students. Parent involvement is directly correlated to greater student success. We scored 90% positive feedback in "Parent Involvement in School" which further supports the success of this 3 year long initiative. The school administration, in collaboration with the inquiry team, Impact teams, SAT and ENL teams continue to analyze trend and patterns in the data and concluded that due to the fact that we are a very transient community that is comprised by many non-English speaking families, we need to continue to focus on and emphasize this framework element to ensure greater achievement for our diverse ENL students. Our goal for 2018-2019 will be to continue to work harder to build a positive relationships with our families so that they are partners in their child's learning. We have an open door policy and provide parents with support to help their children at home, academically, physically and emotionally. Our parent coordinator is an integral part of the relationship between all stakeholders in the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school-wide efforts to encourage strong family-community ties, 90% of our English Language Learning (ELL) students in grades K-5 will move two reading levels, as measured by the June 2019 MOSL assessments/Running Records. 2018-19 CEP 78 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration Leadership Team, Parent Coordinator, PTA Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our Teachers College Reading and Writing Literacy Initiative is research based and aligned to the CCSSs. This initiative has proven to be successful in growing our students along the learning continuum. *Parents are included in workshops around the methodologies we use and all parent meetings have student work samples and data at the center to demonstrate student performance. *Parents are invited to attend Columbia teachers College Parent workshops to learn strategies for supporting their children at home and better understand our curriculum. They will be exposed to the English Language Arts Progressions and language domains to better understand how children develop academic language and tools that can foster high level thinking, for example vocabulary concept maps. *Have parent workshops on how we assess students, how we move students along the learning continuum using rubrics and progressions, early reading strategies, etc, so that parents develop a greater awareness of how they can support this learning at home. additionally, we will invite volunteers to translate for our non-English speaking parents. Parents/Guardian needs assessment surveys will be distributed in the beginning of the school year. The ENL impact team lists various workshop ideas for parents to choose. The ENL Team then provides these workshops to our parents of ELLs in an effort to support our diverse community. Workshops will be translated to our non-English speaking families. In-house translation is provided by our staff members in various languages, such as: ELL's Parents 3 times a Administration year during Parent Engagement Tuesday ENL teachers Inquiry and ELA impact team *Spanish *Russian/Ukranian 2018-19 CEP 79  *Polish/Slovak *Albanian *Arabic *Turkish *Azerbaijani *Yugoslavian/Serbian/Croatian Our Leadership Team and PTA will be instrumental in our efforts to brainstorm ideas and facilitate community outreach to bring in speakers and experts to support families, inform them, and provide families with resources available to them....all supporting our instructional goals for students and aligning to our building policies/protocols, etc. Everything will be connected and this will require collaboration, planning, and clear communication as a Team. Parents as learning partners sessions will be held every month where parents are invited to sit in their child’s classroom as a learning partner. Sessions are set up for one period, 8:35 a.m. to 9:20 a.m. on one morning each month. Letters are sent home to the parents ahead of the session, indicating the focus of each session. At the end of the session, parents are invited to participate in a debriefing session where their observations are discussed. This partnership with the school and parents allows the parents to be involved in the teaching and learning of their children. The school leadership Team will continue to reflect on our school wide goals and analyze student data, structures, systems, protocols and policies, to make necessary revisions to our School Comprehensive Educational Plan with student achievement at the core of our practice. We are a warm and welcoming community. We pride ourselves in knowing our families and our children. Our community is culturally and academically diverse and we celebrate and respect that diversity. Within the community there is a scholarly buzz that represents our professional learning community. Parents Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 10/18 11/18 12/18 1/19 2/19 3/19 4/19 5/19 Leadership Team, PTA, Parent Coordinator, Administration, ENL Team Teachers, students, families, admin 2018-19 CEP 80  Admin, Teachers and Parent members of SLT Monthly SLT meetings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our goal for 2018-2019 will be to continue to work harder to build a positive relationship with our families so that they are partners in their child's learning. We have an open door policy and provide parents with support to help their children at home, academically, physically and emotionally. Our parent coordinator is an integral part of the relationship between all stakeholders in the school. The following are some examples of how we incorporate parents into our school community:  Monthly Parents as Learning Partners (Each month covers a different subject area)  Curriculum Conferences  Progress Reports to communicate student academic performance/behavioral concerns  Parent Workshops based on needs assessments (translation available). This data is collected from parent surveys prepared by the school.  Weekly Parent/Teacher Engagement Meetings to address concerns regarding student performance or celebrate student growth  Cromwell Café to celebrate cultural diversity  Grade Assemblies for parents to learn units of study children are immersed in.  Annual Earth Day- Gardening with parents  Celebrating the Student and Citizen of the Month.  Monthly Newsletters for families in each grade. The newsletters are prepared by teachers and inform parents about the units of study  ENL workshops for families  Multilingual friendly school website where families can translate all information with a simple drop down and click.  Workshops with staff who can translate for language groups Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Section 8 Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve 2018-19 CEP 81  this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be 2018-19 CEP 82  eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, 2018-19 CEP 83  State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to SchoolwiPlace an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school Program Name 2018-19 CEP 84  de pool. (Refer to Galaxy for FY ’16 school allocation amounts) has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, page # references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. CCololuummn n A B 2018-19 CEP 85  Verify with an (X) Page # Reference(s) Section 5E Strong Family Community Ties Title I Part A (Basic) Federal $216,605 X Section 8 Part 4a Section 5A, Title II, Part A Federal $66,354 X 2018-19 CEP 86  Title III, Part A Federal $12,366 X 5B and 5C p.13, 38, throughout CEP Section 5C part 4b Section 5D part 4b Sectio2018-19 CEP 87  n 5E part 4a Title III, Immigrant Federal N.A. N.A. AIDP - $18,794 CFE - $42,910 $420215 X $142,587 Pre K- Tax Levy (FSF) LOCAL School Support Supplement- $3,358,328 Tax Levy - Throughout the whole document. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. TTTTT X X X X aiiiittttx Titl 2018-19 CEP 88 llle e e II I ISTA W, P e lIIe I, IIImIm, iPPgaarrrat t A nA t 21st Cen tu ry Grant SI G/SIF OthPeTrIA (n FTKX uain nx dLd eed vy) Levy C4X E Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid Point Checks include but are not limited to: ***February Mid-Year checkpoints consist of Monitoring for Results reading data, ,Mid-Year TCRWP MOSL running record data. We will extract data for the Ells, Boys, and Hispanic sub groups targeted to better monitor for progress Data Impact Team will analyze teacher data as a building to create graphs of school wide performance to compare proficiency levels. This will delineate a bird's eye view of the building and data trends by grade. 2018-19 CEP 89  Teachers will analyze mid-year data to take stock of student progress/sub group progress, and make adjustments accordingly as they plan next steps. Mid Year check points and data will be shared, analyzed and discussed at School Leadership Team Meetings in relation to our CEP Goals. Although we have our mid-year checkpoints, it is important to note that data collection and monitoring occurs in consistent cycles as delineated below to better compare and measure progress and to track trends and patterns in student performance. ● TCRWP Running Record/MOSL Assessments (quarterly) ● On The Go Assessments and conference notes-Daily ● RTI Data (Once a Month) ● Student Projects and tasks that are bench marked to CCSS aligned rubrics (Sept. and February) ● Authentic student work samples aligned to performance indicators and rubrics (beginning, middle, and end of each unit of study) NYSESLAT proficiency levels will be analyzed and used to plan for language acquisition  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCRWP Running Record data will be used to assess reading progress of our Ells. Other data will also facilitate progress monitoring such as: Formative Assessments and Success Criteria Unit Pre-Assessments and Progressions On-Demand Informational writing Frequency in which assessments are administered and compared to previous data: September 2018   November 2018   March 2019  January 2019 June 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 90  2018-19 CEP 91  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Criteria for determining AIS Is determined by standard and non- standard data and authentic samples of student work that demonstrate a child is performing below standard/benchmarks. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Small group instruction is a building wide focus and the driving force in all classrooms for meeting students’ needs. Great Leaps, SPIRE and Orton Gillinghamare used with students who demonstrate poor phonemic/phonics awareness skills in grades K-5. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group During school day Depending on students’ needs this can be small group and one on one. Whole and small group During school day “ “ “ “ “ “ Small group Before school day can be small group and one on one. On Saturdays On Saturdays Wednesdays for 2 hours Interactive/shared writing with students in grades K-2 Small group Whole group and small group Whole group and small group Whole group and small group Strategy driven reading/writing/math boot camps based on student need based on data. SETSS for IEP students in need Early grade tutorial for children in grades K-2 Saturday Test Prep Academy for students in grades 3-5 2018-19 CEP 92  Mathematics Science Social Studies Early Childhood Saturday Academy K-2 Title III afterschool [program to support ESL students First in Mathprogram with an emphasis on basic math skills for students in need in grade 3 -5(based on grant writing) Saturday Test Prep Academy for students in grades 3-5 SETSS for students with IEPs Technologybased sheltered model program for ENL and spec ed as well as lowest 1/3 STEM and Content units of study are integrated in our reading and writing curriculum maps as well as project based and hands on inquiry learning. Targeted groups in lowest 1/3 During the school day Whole group and small group One on One and small group Smalltargeted groups Whole and small group On Saturdays During school day During the school day and during title III ENLafterschool program During school day Inquiry Investigative Method and social studies Content units of study are integrated in our Whole and small group During school day Based on the following standard and non-standard data: State Math Test, Go Math pre, mid, and end of year assessments, Go Math unit tests, on the go assessments and observations, IEPs, authentic student work portfolios and notebooks Help Math Science is integrated within the literacy block in addition to the fact that students in grades 3-5 have a separate science period. Student notebooks serve as portfolios, performance tasks in science and within classrooms are also used. Social studies is integrated within the literacy block in addition to the fact that students in 2018-19 CEP 93  grades K-5 have a separate social studies period. Student notebooks serve as portfolios, performance tasks in social studies and within classrooms are also used. Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Assessment Program; MOSL; screenings At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) reading and writing curriculum maps as well as project based and hands on inquiry learning. Increase vocabulary through labeling, categorizing, reading, pictures, etc. 2x30 1:1 speech language therapy sessions During school day Improve articulation through PROMPT and oral-motor strategies Improve phonemic awareness skills by having students identify letter/sounds; phonics Improve reading fluency, comprehension, through repeated readings Improve writing, grammar 2018-19 CEP 94  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have 6 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Once students in temporary housing are identified, we send fliers, pamphlets, and Mc Kinney Vento forms are back-packed home in all languages based on need. We provide families with information and we utilize our School Assessment and Intervention teams to support families in need with counseling, resources and support programs. We also inform them of the academic interventions/enrichment services that their children are entitled to and we inform them that these services are provided during the school day and after school. We highly encourage them to enroll their children as they will benefit. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 95  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 96  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● We have developed an HR committee to interview and observe new prospective teaching candidates as they teach a model lesson in a classroom prior to hiring. ● In House Staff teachers College staff developers provide ongoing PD to all teachers 3-5 and K-2 in reading and writing units of study, analyzing student data and work samples, planning, demonstrating in lab sites, curriculum mapping, etc. ● All teachers are sent to Teachers College for Professional Development and have a voice in workshops that meet their needs. ● New Teacher Mentors ● We have built capacity with our staff and share best practices across grades and disciplines. Staff turn-keys information and provides professional development and parent workshops in areas of expertise. ● Grade Inquiry sessions are all aligned to Danielson ● 99% of our staff has Masters Degrees. ● Every Monday is devoted to Professional Development after school. The PD is tailored to teachers' needs (based on the needs assessment data collected from surveys). - 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Staff Professional Development: As outlined, as a community of practice we are committed to 2018-19 CEP 97  continuing to grow ourselves professionally. (Capacity Framework: 5A: 5B Supportive environment, 5c: Collaborative Teachers, 5D: Effective school Leadership ) All professional development and faculty conferences are aligned to the CCSSs and Framework for Great Schools.  School Leaders attend LPG (Learning Partner Groups) monthly sessions provided by BFSC members. Additionally, they visit schools around the borough to gather information and share best practices.  Teachers watch and analyze Common Core aligned videos on Engage NY and reflect on the Danielson competencies and their practice. ● Administration provides on going feedback to staff and enters observations into Advance. ● Training on pacing calendar: coverage of Content Standards for NY State Math Tests Grades 3-5 ● Items skills analysis for differentiating instruction. ● PD on Language Progressions for Ells. (Provided by the FSC member) PD on the use of formative assessments. ● Inquiry sessions to look at hard and soft math data and analyze item skills analysis to plan for individual and small group instruction. ● Grade level meetings used for looking at student work, discussing student progress and creating next steps. ● Expand teacher knowledge of math content through exploration based activities ● Continue to work on using assessments to create flexible grouping that best meets the needs of students ● Continue to work on the use of cooperative learning groups during the workshop model ● Looking at student work /Benchmark, Baseline, Predictive/data to inform and drive instruction ● Understanding the use of Math Rubrics and Process of student responses ● Academic Rigor in a Thinking Curriculum ● Strategies that integrate literature into the math curriculum ● Use of technology and SMART BOARDS to enhance lesson planning ● Weekly Inquiry Grade Team meetings continually revisit data in order to diagnose areas of weakness across a grade. ● Teachers will attend and continue to provide RTI professional development and strategy turnkey workshops to the rest of the staff to build capacity. ● Building capacity and supporting teachers by providing Professional Development with the support of a Go Math Staff Developer. 2018-19 CEP 98  ● Go Math alignment to CCSS workshop. Teachers use Go Math strategies to revise math curriculum maps with an emphasis on the major math focus of their grade. ● Teachers will integrate daily word problem activities that are aligned to the expectation of the CCSS and foster independent higher order thinking skills and the use of a variety of math strategies with multiple entry points. ● Word problems will focus on the use of multiple math strands/skills to problem solve with a strong focus on process and constructed responses to problem solving. ● Teachers will compile their word problems to create a Math Word Problem Resource Binder as a reference for all staff who may need access to a variety of word problems on different levels. ● NAEP task complexities will be used to measure math task complexities: low complexity, moderate complexity, high complexity. ● Administering and analyzing the ELA and Math Performance Tasks to drive instruction and RTI. ● Multiple entry points for diverse learners emphasizing Gardener’s Multiple Intelligences and a variety of strategies is considered and integrated into performance tasks. ● Related service personnel will turn-key and articulate with classroom teachers, specific strategies in their area of expertise so that teachers can continue to use them with diverse learners. ● Integration of technology into performance tasks and teachers share of best practices integrating technology: laptops, smart boards, multi-media websites, etc. ● Teachers will work together as a grade. Performance tasks will be aligned to Common Core Standards and content area units and emphasize informational text, writing, higher order thinking skills and high level inquiry work that is project based. ● Teacher planning sessions and inquiry sessions to ensure math performance tasks will be rich in math content vocabulary and emphasize higher order thinking skills to problem solve real world situations. ● Our ESL teacher will continue to share strategies and methods for Juicy sophisticated language and common core language will be used to lift the rigor of performance tasks. ● Teachers will collaborate to research and use variety of resources to design and create performance tasks: Common core standards, performance bundles, Math resources provided by district math liaison, Units of study in reading/writing, social studies curriculum, Non-fiction tool kit, websites. ● Teachers will collaborate to create uniform rubrics on a grade to measure student performance on the ELA, Math, and Content Area Performance tasks. ● NAEP task complexities will be used to measure math task complexities: low complexity, moderate complexity, high complexity. 2018-19 CEP 99  ● Additionally, select teachers will attend specific content area Core Standard workshops (Math, ESL, etc.) and turn-key information for the rest of the staff. ● We will continue to build capacity and utilize related service teachers to turn-key specific strategies and techniques used in their area of expertise to support students in their classroom settings. ● Continue articulation and sharing of best practices to set new goals and continue to grow ourselves and refine our practice. ● We are consistently going into search engines for informational materials that we can use to enhance our curriculum and broaden the lives of our children. ● Much of the work we will be doing will be around text complexity and the use of unpacking strategies to continue to introduce complex text to our students. ● Curriculum Mapping-Across the grades there is a common planning thread that is visible and evident throughout the building. We have used the Understanding by Design model to compose our maps. ● There is instructional coherence. Both children and staff and parents as well) have a common language that has grown over the years. ● Bloom's Taxonomy/Depth of Knowledge continues to be embedded into instructional language, continuing to meet the needs of the variety of learners in the classroom. Tasks are created to scaffold higher order thinking from "remembering (level 1) to creating (level 6). ● We have on-going differentiated professional development that is aligned to specific grades and teacher needs. We have worked closely with Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project for the past 6 years, currently we continue our work with TC, but we also have the District Deputy Director of Instruction working with Grades 3-5 to lift the level of reading work. ● Through our work with TC we have refined our assessment lens to specifically target student needs in reading and writing and gear strategies that are specifically aligned to their needs that consistently keep children intellectually engaged. ● The school has taken huge strides in the use of technology to enhance classroom practice and engagement. There are Smart Boards in every classroom and they are infused within instruction. This tool is used as one of the many methods of presentation and differentiation. Moreover, technology is used as a teacher resource tool for communication, access and organization of data, in addition to peer to peer professional development. ● Language Progression Professional development will be provided to all staff by Mildred Cordova (ESL Specialist) from our Network. Knowledge about Language progressions and how ELLs learn best will be integrated by staff into curriculum maps as Ells are targeted this year and it is a best practice. ● Vertical conversations and planning sessions to grow pedagogy and share best practices. ● We have built capacity whereby teachers support one another, design workshops to share best 2018-19 CEP 100  practices, and have developed model classrooms for others to visit and observe during inter-visitations.  Paraprofessionals- We have taken a vested interest in the professional growth of these staff members. We want them to be as skilled as they possibly can be so that they can support the instruction and classroom practices. They have participated in the following training: Behavior management techniques Small Group Guided Reading Instruction Full study of developmental disorders   Rick Lavoy-FAT City Workshop-Looking through the lens of a disabled child    Reading and understanding their part in IEP goals   RTI  Paras work directly with children all have been trained and certified in CPR and the use of the defibrillator for SESIS Code blue Emergencies.  EPI Pen training in case of a medical emergency.  Great Leaps Training  Make and take practical activities to enhance Great Leaps.  Professional Book study (Book Clubs)  As outlined, as a community of practice, we are committed to continuing to grow ourselves professionally. Capacity Framework: 5B Supportive environment, 5c: Collaborative Teachers, 5D: Effective school Leadership. Our goal is and always has been to provide our children with a quality education that will prepare them to face the challenges they will encounter as they move along the teaching and learning continuum. Paraprofessionals will continue to receive professional development to deepen their understanding and methodologies used when working with and supporting children with special needs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 CEP 101  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● We have Pre-kindergarten orientation days where the parents come in with their children by appointment for small blocks of time so that the children can meet the teacher, see their school and classroom, and begin to get acclimated. ● In the summer before students attend we send home an inviting and informational welcome package to families providing them with strategies to support their child’s transition to Pre-kindergarten. ● Parents are invited to a series of parent workshops ● Family social worker works with classroom teacher to support students and families. ● All families are invited in once a month to engage in Parents as Learning Partner days. ● Social worker works to inform parents on early intervention services as needed. ● Parents are invited to attend all celebrations, workshops, parent teacher conferences, etc. ● This year we hope to have a couple of hands on mommy and me sessions: Puppetry, creative movement, and music and rhythm. ● Teachers have adopted the work sampling system and provide feedback to parents as well as share student portfolios with them. ● At the beginning of the school year we invite pre-K parents to a kindergarten orientation providing them with a snapshot of the school day, materials, and expectations. Moreover we discuss their role in supporting their child. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● We have a MOSL Team comprised of administration and staff. Several members attended summer professional development in MOSL local and state measures and turn-keyed this information to staff. ● Staff was invited to attend other Danielson and MOSL meetings offered by the region and UFT. ● All staff participates in professional development in Danielson (6 or more hours per month). They have also participated in MOSL training and watched an Engage NY video on Teacher Evaluation process and how testing data is used for MOSL to determine State measures of student growth. ● All staff contributed to our MOSL local and State measures selection process. They chose State Tests as a State measure for all grades and TCRWP as a local measure. ● All staff is invited to attend and share their thinking and concerns at morning Instructional Team Meetings where all academic and data related decisions are discussed. 2018-19 CEP 102  ● As a SWP school, all decisions are brought to vote by the UFT Representative. ● We also have a professional development committee which discusses and gathers ideas around PD teachers want/need, are interested in, and would like to present. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local $216,605 $66,354 $12,366 N/A $3,203,834 X X X 0 X Section 8 Part 4a Section 5A, 5B and 5C p.13, 38, Section 5C part 4b Section 5D part 4b Section 5E part 4a N/A Throughout the whole document 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 103  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 104  2018-19 CEP 105  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 38, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 38 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 106  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 107  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Monthly Parents as Learning partner Days School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 38, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 108  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 109  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 110  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 111  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 112 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 113  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: There are 82 ENL students who are invited to participate in the Title III program at P.S. 38. Our ELL population is in grades K-5. Our ELL population is very diverse, with 14 different languages spoken in their homes (Albanian, Arabic, Azerbaijani, Chinese, Mandarin/Cantonese, Polish, Russian, Slovak, Spanish, Turkish, Urdu, Ukrainian and Uzbek). The students are serviced in a Free Standing ENL program where the main language of instruction is English. ELL's are serviced in groups by grade level and English language proficiency level as indicated by their NYSITELL and NYSESLAT test scores. Our school employs a wide range of assessment tools to measure the early literacy skills and language acquisition needs across the grade levels. This data provides insights about our ELL's and informs our school's instructional plan, interventions and supports offered to ELL's before, during and after school. The following Assessment tools are used to analyze the performance levels and growth trends and patterns of our ELL's: Based on current 2017-2018 NYSITELL and NYSESLAT Data, it is noted that we currently have 109 ELL's in our Freestanding ENL program. According to this data, out of 109 students, Commanding ELL's constitute 27 students. Our largest subgroups are the ELL's in lower grades K (27 students), 1st (16 students), 2nd (12 students) and in grade 3 (12 students). There are 15 ELL's in grades 4 - 5. Overall, we have 5 entering, 25 emerging and 15 Transitioning ELL's, 37 Expanding ELL's and 27 Commanding ELLs. As per our end-of-year data analysis in June of 2017-2018 school year, there are 82 ELL students in various proficiency levels assessed in grades K-5. According to the MOSL assessments (TCRWP Running Records), as of June 2018, one student in kindergarten did not meet the goal as set in the CEP. 81 students met the goal as per the CEP (99%). Our plan for this Kindergarten student is to continue to support him with RTI and targeted small group and one- on- one interventions in addition to his mandated ENL services. He will also be invited to all the additional remedial and enrichment before and afterschool programs to continue developing his English language skills with more frequency and duration of supports. His family will be invited to participate in on-going, targeted, collaborative parent-teacher learning sessions provided by his classroom teacher and the ENL teacher to share tools and resources with parents on the best practices they can use at home to support his learning and language acquisition. All English Language Learners will be immersed in deep and rigorous academic instruction with a strong emphasis on higher order thinking skills, formative assessments and success criteria. They will also be immersed in writing across content areas, and in addition to the ENL services, they will receive small group instruction within the context of their classrooms. They will participate in our rich Title III program which will run once a week for 2 hours. They will be engaged in high interest, inquiry-based learning activities and hands-on lessons. The emphasis will be on helping children develop oral English language, build higher level of academic content specific vocabulary, learn how to unpack complex text, lift student understanding and engage in critical analysis and evaluation. Title III Program Schedule and Duration: 2018-19 CEP 114  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information In 2018-2019 school year, the Title III program will run for 13 weeks, every Wednesday for 2 hours, from 2:45 pm till 4:45 pm. The first day of Title III is Wednesday, November 14, 2018 and the last day is Wednesday, February 13th, 2019. Record Keeping We have a system in place to maintain all important documentation and records. A specifically created binder containing student lists, schedules and attendance records will be stored in a safe place and all records will be kept in order to maintain compliance and accountability. These records include but are not limited to: Title III invitations in parent preferred language of communication, parental consent of Title III program participation for their child, permission slips for outside of the school walks, visits and shared experiences and photographing, Title III parent meetings and workshops/trainings with agenda and sign in sheet; student attendance records, after-school meal accountability records and all Title III program notifications in parents' preferred language, Title III Teacher Professional Development trainings and planning dates. All this documentation will be organized and maintained in a Title III 2018-2019 Binder located in the central location in the main office. Student Grouping for Instruction: 2018-2019 Title III program will be provided in groups by 4 highly trained teachers servicing students in 3 groups by grade bands. We are an all inclusive school providing all our children with opportunities to participate in all and every program. ALL ELL's will be invited and those whose families choose to participate will be included in the program as per their parents' choice. The students will be placed by grade band into 3 groups- the Kindergarten group, Grades 1-2 group and Grades 3-5 group. They will be serviced by one certified ENL teacher, one Grade 2 teacher and one Grade 5 Teacher respectively. The second certified ENL teacher will work collaboratively with the two content teachers and co-teach, one hour with each content teacher. The teachers will be planning and teaching together, fostering more one-on-one and small group interaction and to ensure that all activities are scaffolded and differentiated to meet the needs of our ELL subgroups. Based on the NYSESLAT/ NYSITELL, and the data previously mentioned, it is noted that our grade K-2 children need additional support in oral language acquisition, gaining a repertoire of content-specific academic vocabulary, and building a strong base of early literacy skills, which will allow them to improve and succeed in reading, writing, speaking, listening, and thinking. Moreover, our data indicates that our ELL students in the early grades show no/minimal prior academic educational experiences/exposures. Therefore our goal for these children is to expose them to a variety of additional experiences that will enrich and build their background knowledge, academic vocabulary, and widen their horizons in literacy and across content areas. Additionally, our running records and formative assessments show that these students need extra support in lifting their levels of comprehension, retelling, sequencing, expressing thoughts and ideas orally using more complex vocabulary, turn and talk, think-pair-share, oral presentations , debates, sequential how-to's, projects, school-home connection activities/projects and further opportunities to articulate their language objectives through shared experiences, inquiry based learning and hands-on-activities. Furthermore, according to the data previously mentioned, the ELL students in grades 3-5 need additional support in writing. Our records show that this specific group needs additional support in building writing skills and strategies to be able to respond to literature, answer open ended questions, use specific writing structures and strategies (Boxes and Bullets, note taking, paragraphs with several examples and supporting evidence), unpacking complex Common Core based questions and texts, accumulating texts, annotating, essay writing structures and distinguishing the difference between various types of essays (literary, persuasive, and argumentative). Due to the high intensity, fast pacing, and grit of the Common Core based lessons and activities performed during the school day, our ELL students demonstrate a high need for additional time and additional supports, resources and tools, necessary for the mastering 2018-19 CEP 115  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information of the skills and strategies required for academic success. Therefore, our plan for this group is to provide them with multiple opportunities to research various literary and on-line sources to build background knowledge and academic vocabulary, engage in oral discussions, debates, news broadcasting, fish bowl and Socratic Seminar methods that are engaging, student-centered strategies within the social studies context. Students will then transfer oral language into writing by producing literary, argumentative and persuasive essays, posters, poems, news articles and letters. Students will produce various writing work products for their portfolio collection that they will present at the final celebration in a Gallery Walk. In addition to the scaffolding and differentiation provided by the classroom teachers and the ENL teacher during the school day, the Title III program will offer additional time and highly differentiated instruction in a small group setting, which allows students to work towards meeting their goals. The Title III program will be a supplement to the mandated core instruction. It will provide enrichment opportunities strategically catered to meet the needs of our ELL students. Our goal for the upper grade students is to continue providing them with a rigorous instruction catered to meet their needs with a strong emphasis on academic content language and a strong differentiated instruction in reading, and writing that is tailored based on qualitative and quantitative assessments to address their needs. Our Grade 4 science test data indicates that our ELLs performed very well on the science test, attaining levels 3 and 4. With this said, our goal for this group is to continue supporting them as they develop their English language skills and provide them with a strong content specific academic language. Our goal is to grow our ELLs and to improve their performance across the content areas and grade levels. The children in grades K-5 will be invited to attend an afterschool program, designed specifically for the ELL's that will meet once a week for two hours, every Wednesday from 2:45pm - 4:45pm for 13 weeks starting on November 14th, 2018 and ending on February 13, 2019. The program design is as follows: Kindergarten students will be immersed in literature and language rich experiences with emphasis on active student engagement and oral language development through songs, chants, rhymes, tongue twisters and poetry written by the students. Children in this group will employ total physical response and movement to role play, act out and express themselves orally, by using body language and facial expressions. They will also prepare a famous Fairy Tale of their choice and present an Inventive version of it by role-playing the characters, produce student-created scenes of the setting, costumes and by incorporating music, light/sound effects and technology in their presentation. The school-home connection activities will offer students and parents to tap onto their culture, heritage and language and together they will create a "Fairy Tale Story Box" depicting a Fairy tale of their choice. this activity will be done as a support of native language which families can use for this project. Children will have a choice of presenting their projects in English and/or their mother tongue, or both. In addition, another school-home connection activity will be writing or reciting a beloved or famous poem or chant in their first language and sharing it in front of class and then during our Final Celebration. Grades 1-2 will be learning scientific concepts through reading and writing that will be integrated in informational texts. They will be engaged in high interest, hands-on, inquiry-based scientific explorations and experiments. The emphasis is on helping children develop oral English language, build higher level of academic content specific vocabulary, learn how to unpack complex text, lift student understanding and engage in critical analysis and evaluation.We have noted that the content of the NYSESLAT test for early grades embedded global themes in science and social studies. After carefully analyzing the data, our inquiry team has noted the implications showing there's a need for additional exposure and experiences to broaden students' knowledge and skills, as well as enriching their personal experiences of scientific topics. Students in this group will explore the Global themes such as the Living Environment, Flora and Fauna, Ecology and Environmental awareness. They will be engaged in 2018-19 CEP 116  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information multi-sensory, hands-on shared experiences, observations and explorations which will help them extend their background knowledge of how living things grow and change and how a balanced life style, health and nutrition are important for a growing body. In addition, youngsters will plant the seeds and grow a garden of their own, learn how to take care of the fish and class pets, use hands-on experiences to learn about various kinds of fruits and vegetables, use sequential steps to make simple recipes to create tasty and nutritious snacks. They will tap into their multicultural heritage and culture. We will reach out to families and engage parents and guardians in these activities. Through these unique experiences and supports, our ELL's will be encouraged to take risks with the English language, become more independent and self-motivated to try new things on their own. This way, they will improve their self-esteem, become more engaged and active learners. Our goal for these students is to help them reach self-efficacy and self-actualization by reinforcing the great funds of knowledge and building their capacity. Students will visit a local produce store, Family Fruit as an extension to their learning experiences. We will culminate the program by having a multicultural celebration together with the families where students will share and celebrate their projects, presentations and work. Teachers, staff and families will be welcomed to bring vegetarian dishes representing their heritage and celebrate our diverse community. Moreover, students will provide feedback and reflect on their work as well as set goals for future improvement and growth. Students in grades 3-5 will engage in reading and writing activities that will help them learn how to accumulate text, respond to text and engage in critical analysis of the story plot. In writing, they will be engaged in learning the 3 types of essay structures, specifically, literary essay, persuasive essay and argumentative essay. Students will be able to raise their level of essay writing by working on structure, development and language conventions. Additionally, they will learn and work on creative writing. The focus will be on social issues within the Social Studies (Immigration, Civil War, Bullying, Environmental Integrity, Good Citizenship, Poverty, Discrimination, Disability etc...) Curriculum. The Informational TCRWP Continuum, the Creative Writing Success Criteria rubric and Learning Intentions that the teachers and students create collaboratively will be used to assess student writing and lift quality of writing. In addition to the Mondo program, other supplementary materials and tools will be used to build background knowledge and improve comprehension, enhance vocabulary and presentational oral skills. These materials are distinct from the ones used for daily instruction. These specifically selected resources include and not limited to documentaries, speeches, surveys, newspaper articles, memorabilia, graphic and art images/photographs, Play write scripts and dialogues, video and audio resources of debates and authentic literature, specifically selected Internet resources and interviews of classmates, school staff, families and neighbors will be used as authentic supplementary resources and tools. Program Culmination: The culmination of the Title III program will be a big joint celebration with all the students, families and guests in the All Purpose Room. It will consist of a collaborative celebration of student work. Families will be invited to feast on various multicultural foods representative of their culture and heritage during which students will showcase their work orally, share their written work samples and present their culminating projects. This is a tradition in our school as we are very proud to celebrate our diversity and multiculturalism, as we bring all our families together and showcasing our children's accomplishments. Kindergarten children will present a combination of songs, chants, rhymes, tongue twisters and poetry written by the students. They will act out an inventive version of a famous Fairy Tale of their choice where they will be the characters, set and costume designers. In addition, they will showcase their "Fairy Tale Story Boxes" that they create collaboratively with families and will incorporate a slide show presentation with poems and chants in their native language. Students in Grades 1-2 group will create final fruit/vegetable art pieces with their families, tapping into their culture and heritage, post their recipes with ingredients and a choice of "How 2018-19 CEP 117  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information to" and/or "All About" writing. They will also create posters and informational pamphlets about the Living Environment, Flora and Fauna, Ecology and Saving the Environment. These authentic informational writing pieces will offer readers the many facts and details on how living things grow and change and how a balanced life style, health and nutrition are important for a growing body. Students in Grades 3-5 group will share their portfolio collection of literary, argumentative and persuasive essays, posters, poems, news articles and letters at the final celebration Gallery Walk. Students and parents will have an opportunity to provide feedback using a user-friendly rubric, outlining Glows, Grows and Next Steps. The Title III after-school program will meet once a week for two hours, every Wednesday from 2:45 - 4:45pm. This year, the Title III program will be scheduled in such a way that our certified ENL teaches will Co-Plan, Integrate, analyze student work and growth as well as Co-Teach with the Content Area teachers (Science and ELA). One of the ENL teachers will work with a group as the second ENL teacher will collaborate provide direct instruction to each group for one hour. The ELL's will be immersed in interdisciplinary, English Language Arts and content-based instruction that will integrate reading, writing, listening, speaking, and thinking. Students will be immersed in a rich, authentic literature embedded in the multidisciplinary context of reading, writing, social studies, science, with elements of music, poetry, drama, reader's theater, debate, and art. In this context, students will be provided with additional enrichment opportunities to build/strengthen their background knowledge. This risk-free environment, smaller group size, customized instruction and higher levels of personalized support in addition to the extra time will help this group receive a more comprehensive one-on-one intervention with detailed feedback and opportunities to self-reflect and make improvements. Students will be encouraged to articulate and apply their skills to show their thinking - what they know how to do well, next steps and what they can do to improve. Our goal is to grow critical thinkers who are self-reflective, efficient and successful. Our ELL population is very diverse as noted on the number of languages spoken. Our Title III program will celebrate diversity and enrich the lives of our ELL’s by bringing deep meaning to their cultural heritage, beliefs and values.After deeply analyzing the needs of the ELLs, the Let's Talk About It! Mondo Literacy Program was purchased specifically to help address and supplement the support system in literacy of our ELLs. The Mondo Program is a supplemental program used specifically to support ELL's and distinctly used to supplement instruction at Title III after school program. It is not used during the regular school day and is used only to enhance, differentiate and supplement Title III instruction. The Mondo Program includes: Thematic authentic big books, pictures, photographs, sentence strips, vocabulary cards with pictures and labeled words, multi-genre and multi-leveled texts, pre and post assessments to monitor oral language development, comprehension, and growth. Also, it provides extensions to instruction with videos, listening activities, and technology supports. Furthermore, in addition to the Mondo Program, a variety of instructional materials will be employed in order to teach the English language in context and to support the English language acquisition, at no cost to Title III funds including: · · · · · · · · · Book bins Informational texts Non-fiction libraries Bilingual dictionaries Picture dictionaries Graphic organizers Audiovisuals Realia and manipulatives Personal word banks 2018-19 CEP 118  Thematic word walls Rubrics Artifacts Science lab Science tools and materials specifically selected to supplement materials, resources and Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information · · · · · tools for the Title III program. These will be additional, and distinct material not used in daily instruction. · Video resources-CD players-Cameras Technology:-Smart board-Computer lab and lap tops-Internet-Educational web sites-rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: At P.S. 38, Professional development is an ongoing journey. As planned, administrators, teachers, Paraprofessionals and parents will participate in staff development sessions addressing such areas as the Core Curriculum and how ELL students gain access to it. Our Title III teachers will receive on-going professional development that will help them address the needs of their specific groups and plan lessons, activities, tools and resources that directly impact the academic achievement of the students in Title III program. Our ENL teachers will conduct these trainings and support Title III teachers as needed based on the data, observations and students work samples of the Title III students in their groups. Title III teachers will receive PD on technology-enriched instruction, best ENL practices, the use of graphic organizers, language objectives, tools/resources and vocabulary building activities tailored to meet the linguistic needs of ELL's at each proficiency level. The PD trainings for Title III teachers and common planning times will be done before and/or after school. The new NYCDOE structure provides schools from the Staten Island Borough Field Support Center. The ELL Deputy, ELL coaches and Senior ELL CPS staff provides our ENL teachers and staff with professional development opportunities and trainings throughout the school year, in the summer and after school hours, locally, in schools and in various locations throughout the city. Professional development trainings and technical assistance is also provided by the Regional ELL Coach. The Borough Field Support Center leadership and specialists support teachers and schools visit the school, meet with the staff and administration, share latest updates on the CR-Part 154 mandates and policies, and offers a wide variety of ELL professional development trainings and resources aimed at supporting teachers improve their practices and build capacity within the school building. Regional ELL Support Specialists and our ENL Teachers conduct interactive professional development sessions. All teachers will be provided an opportunity to engage in an ongoing, needs-based PD sessions. In our school, all teachers are considered teachers of ELL's. We pride ourselves with providing high quality, rigorous professional growth opportunities to all our teachers. All teachers are kept informed of professional development opportunities focusing on language development and cultural awareness. 2018-19 CEP 119  Part C: Professional Development All the PD trainings offered to our teachers is carefully tailored to meet their needs and the specific needs of their ELL students. A Needs Assessment Questionnaire is created for teachers to take stock of their specific needs and topics they show a lot of interest in. The survey is carefully analyzed and teachers receive personalized Professional Development opportunities by grade, small group and one-on-one. All the PD's we offer is high quality and valuable as they provide all our teachers with the best practices, latest research-based methods and tools and resources that lift the rigor, scale up teaching expertise and positively impact the level of instruction and support from administration, teacher teams, impact teams, collaboration and partnership with our ENL teachers and ELL support specialists, thus, improve student outcomes and impact the progress of our ELL's. As mentioned previously, it is noted that our grade K-2 children need additional support in oral language acquisition, gaining a repertoire of content-specific academic vocabulary, and building a strong base of early literacy skills, which will allow them to improve and succeed in reading, writing, speaking, listening, and thinking. Moreover, our data indicates that our ELL students in the early grades show no/minimal prior academic educational experiences/exposures. Therefore our goal is to offer teachers a comprehensive, on-going series of tailored PD sessions that focus on these specific needs. Teachers will receive additional tools, resources and supports to address the needs of these children and provide them with a variety of additional experiences that will enrich and build their background knowledge, academic vocabulary, and widen their horizons in literacy and across content areas. Additionally, our running records and formative assessments show that these students need extra support in lifting their levels of comprehension, retelling, sequencing, expressing thoughts and ideas orally using more complex vocabulary, turn and talk, think-pair-share, oral presentations , debates, sequential how-to's, projects, school-home connection activities/projects and further opportunities to articulate their language objectives through shared experiences, inquiry based learning and hands-on-activities. Therefore, out teachers will be engaged in professional learning cycles in collaboration with our ENL support staff to enhance instruction to support the students during the professional development sessions. Our teachers will employ a series of methods and approaches that support our ELL's in the classroom. For example, vocabulary is carefully introduced and associated with what they know; when themes are developed a great deal of time is taken to build background knowledge and use their schema to scaffold their learning. Teachers are provided with glossaries and dictionaries that our ELL's have access to, and the use of cooperative learning techniques, small group, one on one, use of visuals, audio/video, artifacts, smart board and hands on materials and partnerships for oral language development for accountable talk are a common practice in the school. We plan to share the New Directions for ELL's, new Blueprint for English Language Learners (ELLS) Success, the New Language Arts Progressions and a new 2018-2019 CR-Part 154 Policy and Reference Guide in a series of Professional Development sessions. Our teachers will become familiar with the assessments for ELL's such as the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT in order to better understand the demands of these tests and which skills and strategies our students need to be taught in order to meet these demands. Additionally, all teachers will participate in the ENL training on best practices that emphasize differentiated instruction and careful planning to meet the needs of all our ELL's and to build the capacity of all our teachers so that they can deliver high quality instruction. These workshops are available through a variety of forums, such as Teacher's College, District based and Schools Based PD as well as intervisitations within and outside our school. Our ENL teachers, who attend District wide PD sessions and seminars, turn-key the information with administrations and staff. Our District Deputy Director of English Language learners and our ELL Support Specialist visits our school and also provides PD workshops for our staff. Furthermore, our teachers attend ELL workshops and also share the information with their colleagues. 2018-19 CEP 120  Part C: Professional Development This year, Professional Development workshops will be offered on Monday PD days 2:45 - 4:00 p.m. They will be conducted by our ENL teacher/Program coordinator, the District ELL Support Specialists and staff. Teachers will be attending and turn keying ENL PD information to the administration. The PD's will be offered to all our staff, inclusive of classroom and support personnel, paraprofessionals and service providers. Professional Development and articulation with teachers and staff is ongoing, daily. Teachers analyze data, share best practices, conduct inter-visitations, shadowing, and walk-throughs during the course of the entire school year. These carefully planned PD sessions and workshops will be specifically catered to meet the needs of the teachers who work with our ELL population to improve instruction and positively impact academic progress of the ELL's on all grade levels. The goal of all PD trainings our staff receives is to provide teachers with research-based methodologies, skills and best practices, as well as resources and tools that will help them better address the needs of their students, raise their reading levels, build oral and written language skills, improve academic content vocabulary, higher order thinking skills, improve students' academic achievement on NYSESLAT, ELA and Math - moving students from levels 1 and 2 to levels 3 and 4, helping ELL's attain Commanding levels and become proficient in English. Teachers will be provided with multiple opportunities to improve their pedagogy and to grow professionally consistently by attending a variety of different workshops and professional developments. Some of which included but are not limited to: Fordham University, New York University, and Teachers College at Columbia University, upon which teachers receive certificates of completion and meet the mandated hours for ENL PD hours in Methodologies and Best Practices. The dates and titles are as follows: · Overview · Continuum · · Conversations driven by data · · Materials · Progressions · · areas · · · · Indicators · · · ELL Performance · · Strategies for the ELA · November 2018 -Small Group Work in Writing November 2018- Title III Staff Data Inquiry Session November 2018 - ELL and Non-ELL language and content objectives December, 2018 - Looking at Data: The EDAT Tool Estimator with Early Warning December 2018 - Formative Assessments, review and common threads January, 2019 - ELL Assessments: NYSITELL and NYSESLAT January, 2019 - Title III Staff Addressing Teacher's Needs: Best Practices to improve October 2018 - Planning Writing Tasks for ELL's with Data in Mind November, 2018 - Oral Language Objectives and Development within integrated content February, 2019- Instructional Strategies for ELL's with Special Needs March, 2019- Preparing for the NYSESLAT, Test in Review-All Grade Band / Testing September, 2018 - SIOP Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol for ELL's – September, 2018 - Assessments: New Running Records and Reading Progress September 2018 - Behavior Management / RTI September 2018 - Creating a Sensory Smart Classroom Environment / Vertical October, 2018 - K-2 Guided Reading/Transference / Word Study October, 2018 - Title III Staff Preliminary Meeting Planning, Goals, Expectations, October 2018 - Introducing the new Blueprint for ELL's Success and the New Language exam 2018-19 CEP 121  Part C: Professional Development · April, 2019 - Testing Strategies for the Math exam · May, 2019 -Overview NYSESLAT Rubrics for Scoring · June, 2019 - A Year in Review, Implications for upcoming year, Grows and Glows. We have a system in place to maintain all important Professional Development records. The ENL personnel organizes all PD related materials and mandated records in a separate location in the main office. The PD documentation and all records are kept in order to maintain compliance and accountability, to keep track of the required PD ratio on all ELL related topics and the names of all participants with signatures are maintained for accountability and protocols. These records include but are not limited to: Titles and goals of meetings and workshops/trainings with agenda and sign in sheet; certificates of participation and completion, records of all teachers and staff mandated number of hours on ELL topics. All this documentation is organized and maintained in a Professional Development Master Binder 2018-2019 located in the main office. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: We are proud to say that at P.S. 38, we pay particular attention to all of our parents, and especially the parents of our growing ELL population, as we believe, "it takes a village to raise a child". Our parents know that in our school we promote and practice mutual support, cooperation and collaboration between administration, teachers and parents. All staff members make it a priority to create a safe, welcoming environment and address all the questions and concerns that might arise during the school year. In collaboration with our ENL teachers, meetings and workshops are being held throughout the school year. Parents and families are encouraged to participate in the Parent Orientation for new arrivals at the beginning of the school year upon their registration. Also, a series of workshops are offered to the parents so that they can learn more about the ENL program, Title III and other programs offered in our school for ELL students, as well as State standards, assessments and expectations. Parents are invited to attend an Annual Parent Symposium for parents of ELL's, where they have an opportunity to learn more about programs, methodologies, strategies and skills they can practice at home with their children in their native language and in English. Parents participate in all parent workshops offered at our school. They are invited to our monthly Parent as Learning Partner Days to observe and engage in a learning experience with their child. These monthly sessions are focused and give our Parents an opportunity to better understand our curriculum, our practices and how standards are integrated in everything we do. Our ENL Teachers, and our Parent Coordinator, as well as administration are always available to discuss the activities that are specifically targeted to our ENL Constituency. Our ELL parents will be offered a series of highly engaging, meaningful and high interest Parent Engagement Activities that are additional to all the parent events that are taking place in our school. Specifically, our ELL parents will have a Needs Assessment Survey offered to them in their languages in order to take stock of topics of their interest. In addition to these high interest parent workshops, our plan is to offer ELL families a targeted, individualized and personalized series of trainings and supports that are data driven and focus specifically on the individual needs of their children. Our goal is to encourage ELL parents to increase involvement in their child's 2018-19 CEP 122  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities education and to equip parents with a toolbox of best practices, strategies and resources they can use to help their children at home. All parent engagement activities will be provided by highly trained professionals, teachers, support specialists, administrators, guest speakers and community based organizations specializing in assisting families of ELL's. Moreover, our data shows that the demographics of our student population has shifted. In addition to receiving many Russian and Spanish-speaking families, there is a large influx of Chinese-speaking families whose children are brand new to our school and the school system in general. Our plan for these families is to welcome them into our P.S. 38 family, to build partnerships and to share our goals and plans for their children's success. Our shared goal for all our children is to ensure they are safe, protected, loved and receive the highest level of education and social-emotional support. Our newcomer parents will receive various resources, information and supports they need in their native language. The presentations will be done by our highly trained staff who shares the same linguistic background with the families to build their support, trust and collaboration. We are reaching out to Community based organizations to collaboratively offer our families additional resources and support systems. All information and communication will be offered in parents' preferred language. All notification of events, letters, forms and school-home communication will be provided in the home language as well as translation services at the events and all parent meetings will be offered. Prior to the commencement of the program parents are invited to a TITLE III orientation. At the orientation, they are introduced to the staff that provides services, overview program goals, specific areas to be targeted, why specific areas are targeted, how they will be addressed and how they enhance student learning and achievement. The parents will receive a schedule of when the program begins and ends, and they will also get an overview of materials that will be used. In addition, it must be noted that all our parents are invited to participate in collaborative parent-child activities, including a final assembly and student work celebration that culminates the program. All Parent engagement activities we plan are highly meaningful, comprehensive and aimed to address the needs of all of our parents and especially the parents of ELL's. We make sure to offer our parents all the materials, resources and tools they need to help their children at home. We also provide interpretation services and provide written materials in parents' home language using the Interpretation and Translation services, the automated calling system and the teachers who speak the languages. In addition, parents are encouraged to become members of the PTA, School Leadership Team, Reading Volunteer Program, and are invited to participate in Family Nights, Parent as Learning Partner days, assemblies, and all other activities and events throughout the course of the school year. Parents are notified at our PTA Meetings, SLT team meetings and via flyers, letters, instant messenger and our school website. At P.S. 38, Professional development is an ongoing journey. As planned, administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals and parents will participate in staff development sessions addressing such areas as the Core Curriculum and how ELL students gain access to it. Regional ELL Instructional Support Specialists and our ENL Teacher conduct interactive professional development sessions inclusive of all teachers and staff. This year we have developed a Parental Needs Assessment Survey aimed at gathering specific information about the topics the families and guardians are interested in learning more about. This data was carefully analyzed and common threads were identified. All of the parent workshops, activities and trainings as well as informational and learning sessions were carefully designed with our Administration, teachers, parents and support staff in order to address the needs of the parent constituents, and to provide them with the tools and resources they need to support their children at home. Also, this allowed us to find another avenue to engage the families and broaden communication with families. Our findings are that many families have expressed that all of the activities mentioned above prove to be highly effective and offered our families new and improved opportunities to be involved and participate in school life and in the lives of their children before, during and after school. 2018-19 CEP 123  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities It is important to note that as well as having a very culturally diverse student and parent population, we also have hired and implemented a diverse staff to match our demographics. Noting the increase in Chinese speaking families,for example, this year we have hired a Chinese ESL teacher who speaks and writes both Mandarin and Cantonese. Because our staff is culturally diverse, our families find a comfort level in knowing we have their children's best interests at heart and that we strive to maintain open lines of communication. Simultaneously, this enables us to better support our multi-lingual students throughout each learning day. It builds their self-confidence and is directly correlated to their social/emotional development providing equity and access for all. In our school, all teachers are considered teachers of ELL's. We pride ourselves with providing a high quality, rigorous professional growth opportunities to all our teachers. All teachers are kept informed of professional development opportunities focusing on language development. Our teachers employ a series of methods and approaches that support our ELL's in the classroom. For example, vocabulary is carefully introduced and associated with what they know; when themes are developed a great deal of time is taken to build background knowledge and use their schema to scaffold their learning. Teachers are provided with glossaries and dictionaries that our ELL's have access to, and the use of cooperative learning techniques, small group, one on one, use of visuals, audio/video, artifacts, smart board and hands on materials and partnerships for oral language development for accountable talk are a common practice in the school. We plan to share the New Directions for ELL's, new Blueprint for English Language Learners (ELLS) Success, the New Language Arts Progressions and the new data collection tool, the AMAO Tool Estimator with Early Warning Indicators in a series of Professional Development sessions. Our teachers will become familiar with the assessments for ELL's such as the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT in order to better understand the demands of these tests and which skills and strategies our students need to be taught in order to meet these demands. In addition, all teachers will participate in the ENL training on best practices that emphasize differentiated instruction and careful planning to meet the needs of all our ELL's and to build the capacity of all our teachers so that they can deliver high quality instruction. These workshops are available through a variety of forums, such as Teacher's College, District based and Schools Based PD. Our ENL teachers, who attend District wide PD sessions and seminars turn-key the information with administrations and staff. Our Network ELL Support Specialist, visits our school and also provides PD workshops for our staff. Our Teachers attend ELL workshops and also share the information with their colleagues. We have a system in place to maintain all important documentation and records pertaining to the parental engagement activities we offer at our school, inclusive of the families of ELL's and students with disabilities. A specially created binder is located in a safe place and all records are kept in order to maintain compliance and accountability as well as to gather parental feedback on the topics of interest that we will plan for them in the course of the year. These records include but are not limited to: Parental Needs Assessment Survey in the parents' preferred languages, Title III invitations in parent preferred language of communication, agendas and sign in sheets of all family outreach activities, parent development trainings and workshops, Title III parent meetings and workshops/trainings with agenda and sign in sheet; Family PD invitations and Title III program notifications in parents' preferred language. All this and other supporting documentation is organized and maintained in a Parent Engagement Binder 2018-2019 located in the main office. This year, Parent Engagement activities and Professional Development workshops will be offered on Tuesdays, 2:45pm - 4:00pm, our Parent days, as well as on Thursdays and other days throughout the school year. Some of the Parent engagement activities will be offered after school and on weekends by the District professionals and parent outreach organizations affiliated with the DOE. They will be conducted by our ENL teachers, the District ELL Specialists, teachers who will be attending and turn keying ENL PD information and the administration as well as our 2018-19 CEP 124  October, 2018- Title III Parent Meeting October, 2018- Pumpkin Patch/ Wonder Walk ParadeNovember,&nbsp;2018 - Parent November, 2018 - Book Fair with Families November, 2018 - New&nbsp;Dorp&nbsp;Library Visit with Families November,&nbsp;2018&nbsp;-&nbsp;Cromwell&nbsp;Cultural Cafe&nbsp;Family and November, 2018 - Parents as Learning Partners. Focus- MathNovember, 2018&nbsp;-October, 2018 - Families Fostering Success Parent Reading Volunteer WorkshopOctober September, 2018- Meet and Greet with Principal and Staff September, 2018- Parent Orientation for New&nbsp;ELL&nbsp;AdmitsOctober, 2018- Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Parent Coordinator, and her colleagues from central. All parents of ELL's will be invited to participate. This year, to better accommodate our Non-English speaking families we will have in-house staff present that can translate to language groups such as Chinese, Russian, Spanish, and Arabic. Based on parent survey results we may craft specific workshops as per their cultural/linguistic interests, however it is important to note that we are all-inclusive and consider every family an integral member of the greater school community and we pride ourselves on this inclusion rather than segregation. The tentative dates and topics are as follows: · · Early Reading Strategies Workshop for parents of children in Grades K and 1 · 2018- Parents as Learning Partners. Focus - Reading Workshop · · Workshop:&nbsp;ELA&nbsp;and Math State Tests Review in the Light of&nbsp;CCLS's · · · School Community Event · &nbsp;Science Fair Parent Meeting for Grade 4 · · · · · Classroom · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · Children · the&nbsp;YMCA · January, 2019&nbsp;- Parents as Learning Partners. Focus - Writing January, 2019 - Holidays Around the World Celebration with Families January, 2019 - Carnival Night February, 2019&nbsp;- Parents&nbsp;as Learning Partners. Science February, 2019 - Father Daughter Dance March, 2019&nbsp;- Parents as Learning Partners. Focus - Social Studies March, 2019&nbsp;-&nbsp;NYSESLAT&nbsp;Parent Workshop March, 2019 - Science Fair April, 2019 -&nbsp;CASA&nbsp;Grant Performance Dance April, 2019 - Shop Rite Kids Cooking Demo with Families April, 2019 - Plant Day Sale April, 2019 - Harlem Magic Basketball Masters Assembly May, 2019&nbsp;-&nbsp;Cyber&nbsp;Bullying Assembly May, 2019 -&nbsp;Parents&nbsp;as Learning Partners. Focus -&nbsp;Respect for All May, 2019 - Movie Night May, 2019 - Title I Parent Enrichment Trip to&nbsp;Pinot&nbsp;Palette May, 2019 - Make your own T-Shirt School Spirit Day with Families June, 2019 - Teddy Bear Night (Puppet Show) for Pre-K to Grade 2 Families and November, 2018 - Shop Rite Turkeys for Families in Need December, 2018&nbsp;-&nbsp;Holiday Fair/ Food Drive December, 2018&nbsp;- Parent-Child workshop "Book Making" December, 2018 - Gingerbread House Family Engagement December, 2018&nbsp;- Parents as Learning Partners. Focus - Use of Technology in the June, 2019 -&nbsp;Free Citizenship Application Assistance Workshop provided by June, 2019 - Donuts with Dad 2018-19 CEP 125 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 12,366 2018-19 CEP 126  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name The George Cromwell School Borough Staten Island School Number 038 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Nancy Murillo Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Emma Dukhovny and Leidona Gjon Teacher/Subject Area Allison Regan Teacher/Subject Area Mary Frisz Related-Service Provider Judith Anastasio Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Teuta Ulaj Coach N/A School Counselor Stacy Madaio Parent Nicole Ryan Parent Coordinator Mercedes Chow Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 340 2018-19 CEP 127 Total number of ELLs 85 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 25.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 5 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 K N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 4 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 3 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The following Assessment tools are used school wide: • School Quality Snapshot Data • NYSITELL • NYSESLAT • Spanish LAB-R • TCRWP - Spelling Assessments / Running Records • TCRWP Genre Based Assessments Grades 2-5 • On-Demand Writing (Writing Continuum) • Beginning, Middle and End of the Year Assessments and Chapter/Unit Assessments in Math • Statewide Grades 3-5 ELA and Math 2018-19 CEP 128  • Grade 4 Science • Performance Tasks for Grades K-2 • Periodic Assessments (Baseline Fall and Spring, Grades 3-5) • Project Based Assessments • EDAT Tool • Formative Assessments • Teacher Observations Based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT Data, it is noted that we currently have 80 ELL's in our Freestanding ENL program. The following data is the breakdown of our ELL students by grade:Kindergarten: 16 ELL's , not including 9 Proficient ELL's.Grade 1: 9 ELL's and 2 Commanding ELL.Grade 2: 20 ELL's and 4 Commanding ELL's.Grade 3: 9 ELL's and 2 Commanding ELL's.Grade 4: 13 ELL's and 3 Commanding ELL'sGrade 5: 6 ELL's and 1 Commanding ELL. By looking at the proficiency level breakdown;8 ELL's are at the Entering level,4 are at the Emerging level,13 are at the Transitioning level,48 are at the Expanding level and12 are Commanding (the commanding students in kindergarten are not included in this number). It should be noted that none of the students incoming to Kindergarten from Pre-K are at the Entering Proficiency level. This is a testament of the successful impact of the supplemental early intervention programs: Fundations and Sound and Motion on our students oral language development and early literacy skills. These programs are provided by trained speech teachers and next steps include continuing to offer these programs to Pre-K and to expand to offer to our Kindergarten students. We also plan to train more teachers in Orton Gillingham and INSPIRE literacy program. Therefore, we have 73 current ELL's and 12 Commanding-Proficient ELL's. The data demonstrates that our ELL students have made substantial progress and are now considered as Expanding ELL students.Our goal for this group is to continue providing them with a rigorous academic support and a strong curriculum that is highly differentiated to meet their needs and to obtain proficiency.The Data from last year's ELA shows that 11 students in Grade 3 were tested and their results are as follows:Two of the students scored at level 1, Six students are at level 2, Three students were at a level 3, and none received a level 4. Three students were exempt from the ELA test as newcomers but they were tested in math.Out of the Six students tested in grade 4, Three are at level 1, and Three students are at level 2. Out of our eight Fifth graders, seven Fifth graders took the ELA state exams, one was exempt, and their results are as follows: four students performed at level 1, two students performed at level 2 and one at a level 3.The Data from last year's Math shows that out of 14 third graders tested, 3 students performed at level 1, 5 students performed at level 2, 4 of the students performed at level 3 and two students performed at a level 4. Our seven fourth graders show the following results: Two student performed at level 1, Two at level 2 and another One at level 3, and Two received a level 4. Eight students took the fifth grade math exam and we had Five students at level 1, Two students at level 2, One student at level 3, there were no students at a level 4.The Fourth grade science test data shows that out of Seven ELL students tested, Five students performed at level 3 and Two students performed at a level 4. This data shows that our ELL's performed well on the ELA and Math tests and most of them obtained proficiency. Our goal for this group of upper grade students is to continue providing them with a rigorous instruction catered to meet their needs with a strong emphasis on academic content language and a strong differentiated instruction in reading, writing and math that is tailored based on formative assessments to address their needs. Our ELL's show growth on the standardized tests and we will continue to provide them with tailored instruction that is infused with supports they need to grow/maintain their performance. The support will be, but not limited to targeted interventions and strategy-driven instruction in all core subject areas before, during and after school.According to the Grade 4 science test results, all of our seven students performed at a level 3 and 4. Our ELL's performed very well on the science test, therefore, our goal for this group is to continue supporting them as they develop their English language skills and provide them with a strong content specific academic language. Our ENL teacher will collaborate with classroom teachers and the science teacher to design science content comprehensive lessons and activities to offer our students additional tools and resources to build background knowledge on the topics they will work on. Our goal is to grow our ELL's and to improve their performance across the content areas and grade levels. Here are our findings as we reviewed the data and looked at patterns and similarities across grades and proficiency levels:The Data from the TCWRP assessments show that our grade K-2 children, students new to the system and students with disabilities show needs in development of the oral language and early literacy skills. With this said, we are setting a standard of expectations in regard to language acquisition and development. Specifically, we want our children to be able to speak in complete thoughts and use a rich, more complex vocabulary, inclusive of the content specific academic vocabulary, to express their thinking, ideas and points of view not only orally but also in writing and across content areas. Therefore, this year, we are setting goals for the children that are inclusive of these needs. NYSESLAT and ELA Data shows that ELL's in grades 3-5 need 2018-19 CEP 129  additional support in writing. For example, they need additional skills and strategies to be able to respond to literature, answer open ended questions, use specific writing structures and strategies (Boxes and Bullets, note-taking, paragraphs with several examples and supporting evidence), essay writing format and distinguishing the difference between various essays (literary, persuasive, argumentative). The ENL teacher will provide the students with additional support during integrated services. She will collaborate with classroom teachers to design/create tools to support their language barriers.All English Language Learners will be immersed in deep and rigorous academic instruction with a strong emphasis in higher order thinking skills, formative assessments and success criteria. They will also be immersed in writing across content areas, and in addition to the ENL services, they will receive small group instruction within the context of their classrooms. They will participate in our rich Title III program which will run once a week for 2 hours. They will be engaged in high interest, inquiry-based learning activities and hands-on lessons. The emphasis will be on helping children develop oral English language, build higher level of academic content specific vocabulary, learn how to unpack complex text, lift student understanding and engage in critical analysis and evaluation. Students will culminate the program by celebrating their projects, presentations and writing with their families.Students in grades 3-5 will engage in reading and writing activities that will help them learn how to accumulate text, respond to text in critical analysis of the story plot and will implement self-assessment and success criteria by using grade level progressions. In writing, they will be engaged in learning the 3 essay writing structures, specifically, literary essay, persuasive essay and argumentative essay. Students will be able to raise level of essay writing by working on structure, development and language conventions. The informational TCRWP Non Fiction/ Informational Continuum will be used to assess student writing and lift quality of writing. The culmination of the program will consist of a celebration of student work.In addition, our ELL's are invited to attend a wide range of instructional support groups with focus on reading, writing, math, and the arts. While some programs serve as remediation and offer extra practice, other programs enrich students' lives and broaden their horizons, offering all children opportunities to learn how to express themselves through dance, theater and documentary film-making.The AIS support service is available for our ELL's to receive assistance in small reading and math groups that are fluid and serviced within the classroom. Also, targeted children, inclusive of the Commanding ELL's who attained proficiency are grouped according to their needs and serviced during the Integrated ENL instruction in order to build English language skills through content area instruction in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies in a co-teaching model.In addition, our K-2 ELL's are invited to attend the Early Morning Academy "Math Mania" which is offered 2 times a week for an hour and provides children with the opportunity to develop/strengthen their basic mathematical skills. They are also invited to participate in the Saturday Early Childhood Academy. This program is offered for 10-12 weeks to all students inclusive of ELL's for 3 hours and focuses on the reading, writing and math skills they will need to develop to successfully broach the ELA and Math exams. Moreover, children in upper grades are offered a new enrichment, computer-based, interactive program IReady which allows them to practice their math and reading skills (each for an hour), monitor their progress and make improvements each time they complete an assignment. All children inclusive of current and Commanding ELL's are invited to participate in the following programs throughout the day, before, after school and on Saturdays: - VR Quest Grades 4 & 5 (Provided for students in various performance tiers. - Immigrant AIS Reading Program - Title III (All ENL Proficiency Levels) - CASA Art (K-2) (3-5) - CASA Dance (K-2) (3-5) - Saturday Academy ELA and Math Prep - BOKS (K-1) (2-3) - BOKS (SPRING 3-4) - Morning Math (3-5) -Yearbook Committee - Flag Football (3-5) - Reading Bootcamp (3-5) -Orton Gillingham (K-2) Our Data Inquiry Team examines the NYSESLAT data carefully and all teaching and learning decisions are closely aligned to how students move along the continuum. We use the data to adjust and tailor our instruction and to group children during reading, math, science and social studies. We provide the tailored instruction to our targeted strategy driven groups.In the beginning of 2018-19 CEP 130  the school year, the teachers administer baseline assessments and identify struggling students in their class. They present the list in the first PPT meeting. The SAT members design a plan to address the needs of these students. If we determine that a child or a group of children are not making gains, the team immediately contacts the parent of the child to discuss the concerns and collaboratively develop an action plan. If there continues to be no progress, the parents are contacted again and once all intervention measures are assessed and discussed with the parent, we make further recommendations for additional testing so that the student's needs can be met. If the parent refuses, we continue to support the student to the best of our ability. Our data drives instruction. It drives flexible grouping in all content areas. Student's individual needs are addressed and carefully monitored. Small group work is differentiated and a variety of skills and strategies are used to meet the needs of all of our ELL students. As indicated on the ELA and Math Standardized exams, our ELL students are making steady gains.Last year's Progress Report demonstrates that we earned extra points in ELA and Math because testing ELL's fell within the 75th growth percentile. This is a testament to our rigorous instructional ENL program. It is important to note that though our students are provided with tests in their native language and are allowed to test in their native language, the majority of them choose to test in English. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The following structures are in place to guide instructional planning for our Ells: Teams inclusive of classroom teachers, ENL teachers, Cluster teachers, and other Support Personnel. We have established a team structure with specific duties and time for instructional planning. Teachers are teamed up into grade-level, grade-level cluster, or subject-area instructional teams. Instructional teams meet for blocks of time throughout the school year to develop & refine units of instruction & review student learning data.Our teacher teams engage in aligning instruction with Common Core Learning Standards and benchmarks. Instructional teams develop standards-aligned units of instruction for each subject and grade level. Units of instruction include standards-based objectives and criteria for mastery. Additionally, our teachers are engaged in assessing and monitoring student mastery. This includes Summative and Formative assessments. The units of instruction include pre-/post-tests to assess student mastery of standards based objectives. The data guides individual student goal setting and and Success Criteria for mastery. The Success Criteria includes strategies and examples for each learning strand. The unit pre-/post-tests results are reviewed by the instructional team. The data guides instruction, goal setting, and the creation of tools and resources to support student mastery. It is also important to note that our gaol is to grow independent, assessment-capable reflective learners. With this said, our students are continuously engaged in self and peer assessment, using a variety of reflection tools to assess their progress towards mastery and next steps necessary for them to take to move along the learning continuum (Where am I now? Where do I need to be? How am I going to get there?). Moreover, our teachers are engaged in high impact teaching and learning strategies, rigorous planning guided by data and differentiating and aligning learning activities to meet the varios learning styles and needs of our students. The units of instruction include specific learning activities aligned to objectives. Student learning is frequently assessed with standards-based assessments. Instructional teams and School Impact teams use student-learning data to assess strengths and weaknesses of the curriculum and instructional strategies. Instructional teams use student-learning data to plan instruction. Instructional teams use student-learning data to identify students in need of instructional support or enhancement & plan instruction accordingly. Instructional teams review the results of unit pre-/post-tests to make decisions about the curriculum & instructional plans and to identify "at risk" students in need of intervention (AIS/RTI).Furthermore, all teachers develop weekly lesson plans based on aligned units of instruction. All teachers test frequently using a variety of evaluation methods and maintain a record of the results. All teachers differentiate assignments (individualize instruction) in response to individual student performance on pre-tests and other methods of assessment. The ENL teachers will provide the students with additional supports during integrated services. ENL teachers and classroom teachers integrate SIOP model (Content and Language objectives), and scaffold lessons to provide tailored instruction. Teachers collaborate to design/create tools to support ELLs language barriers.All English Language Learners will be immersed in deep and rigorous academic instruction with a strong emphasis in higher order thinking skills, formative assessments and success criteria. They will also be immersed in writing across content areas, and in addition to the ENL services, they will receive small group instruction within the context of their classrooms. They will participate in our rich Title III program which will run once a week for 2 hours. They will be engaged in high interest, inquiry-based learning activities and hands-on lessons. The emphasis will be on helping children develop oral English language, build higher level of academic content specific vocabulary, learn how to unpack complex text, lift student understanding and engage in critical analysis and evaluation. Students will culminate the program by celebrating their projects, presentations and writing with their 2018-19 CEP 131  families.Finially, the AIS support service is available for our ELL's to receive assistance in small reading and math groups that are fluid and serviced within the classroom. Also, targeted children, inclusive of the Commanding ELL's who attained proficiency are grouped according to their needs and serviced during the Integrated ENL instruction in order to build English language skills through content area instruction in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies in a co-teaching model. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As mentioned previously, we use many evaluative tools and assessments to gather information and compile data that help us evaluate the effectiveness of our ENL program and, most importantly, the success of our English Language Learners. We look at children holistically and make observations about their development in academic, social, emotional and even physical areas. It's a team effort and together as a school community we make observations, collect quantitative and qualitative data, state tests, various assessments and anecdotal records. We also keep a very strong communication with families, parents and guardians. We evaluate students' class and home work for quantity and quality. The following data demonstrates the success of our ENL Program and our ELL Students: • School Quality Snapshot Data • NYSITELL • NYSESLAT • Spanish LAB-R • TCRWP - Spelling Assessments / Running Records • TCRWP Genre Based Assessments Grades 2-5 • On-Demand Writing (Writing Continuum) • Beginning, Middle and End of the Year Assessments and Chapter/Unit Assessments in Math • Statewide Grades 3-5 ELA and Math • Grade 4 Science • Performance Tasks for Grades K-2 • Periodic Assessments (Baseline Fall and Spring, Grades 3-5) • Project Based Assessments • EDAT Tool • Formative Assessments • Teacher Observations In addition, Student and Parent Surveys and information learned from all communication with parents. We share and evaluate the data and collaboratively dissect and evaluate our findings to collaboratively make instructional decisions about the strength and weaknesses, areas of improvement, next steps, short and long term goals, planning, monitoring, resources, best practices, techniques and strategies to improve our teaching and learning for all students. One of the indicators of the success of our ENL program was the extra credit that we received on the school's report card. Our ELL's are obtaining proficiency on the NYSESLAT. Almost 50% of our former ELL's exited the program in the previous year. This is a significant indicator of success. Our teachers and staff report that our ELL's are much more engaged in the classroom and across content subjects (teacher's informal observations). The parents share that the children are more engaged at home with homework and projects and are more independent while completing school tasks. We observe that our students are much more active as learners and are more independent in completing class and home work/activities on their own and even when working in cooperative groups and providing assistance and support to other students, many of whom are their English-speaking counterparts. Socially and emotionally, children are more confident, verbal and expressive. They participate in all school activities and projects, presentations and assemblies with more enthusiasm and rigor and are able to showcase their talents and creativity. All of our ELL's are moving steadily along the continuum and show growth on the assessments. In addition, our ELL's display a better quality of work, deeper understanding of complex ideas and themes, increased vocabulary, complexity of ideas, and employ Tier II and III vocabulary and text complexity through writers craft and in discussions. The children are able to complete multi-step tasks and engage in more complex cognitive processes and higher order thinking skills and their language skills are much more sophisticated.Additionally, as mentioned previously, the Data from last year's (2017-2018) ELA shows that 11 students in Grade 3 were tested and their results are as follows:Three students were at a level 3, and none received a level 4. Three students were exempt from the ELA test as newcomers but they were tested in math.Out 2018-19 CEP 132  of the Six students tested in grade 4, none received a 3 or 4.Fifth graders also take the ELA state exams and their results are as follow: two students received a score at a level 3.The Data from last year's Math (2017-2018) shows that out of 14 third graders tested, Four of the students performed at level 3 and two students performed at a level 4.Our seven fourth graders show the following results: One received a level 3, and Two received a level 4.Eight students took the fifth grade math exam and we had one student at a level 3, there were no students at a level 4.Here are our findings as we reviewed the data and looked at patterns and similarities across grades and proficiency levels:The Data from the TCWRP assessments show that our grade K-2 children, students new to the system and students with disabilities show needs in development of the oral language and early literacy skills. With this said, we are setting a standard of expectations in regard to language acquisition and development. Specifically, we want our children to be able to speak in complete thoughts and use a rich, more complex vocabulary, inclusive of the content specific academic vocabulary, to express their thinking, ideas and points of view not only orally but also in writing and across content areas. Therefore, this year, we are setting goals for the children that are inclusive of these needs. NYSESLAT and ELA Data shows that ELL's in grades 3-5 need additional support in writing. For example, they need additional skills and strategies to be able to respond to literature, answer open ended questions, use specific writing structures and strategies (Boxes and Bullets, note-taking, paragraphs with several examples and supporting evidence), essay writing format and distinguishing the difference between various essays (literary, persuasive, argumentative). The ENL teacher will provide the students with additional support during integrated services. She will collaborate with classroom teachers to design/create tools to support their language barriers.All English Language Learners will be immersed in deep and rigorous academic instruction with a strong emphasis in higher order thinking skills, formative assessments and success criteria. They will also be immersed in writing across content areas, and in addition to the ENL services, they will receive small group instruction within the context of their classrooms. They will participate in our rich Title III program which will run once a week for 2 hours. They will be engaged in high interest, inquiry-based learning activities and hands-on lessons. The emphasis will be on helping children develop oral English language, build higher level of academic content specific vocabulary, learn how to unpack complex text, lift student understanding and engage in critical analysis and evaluation. Students will culminate the program by celebrating their projects, presentations and writing with their families during the Title III Final Assembly.Students in grades 3-5 will engage in reading and writing activities that will help them learn how to accumulate text, respond to text in critical analysis of the story plot and will implement self-assessment and success criteria by using grade level progressions. In writing, they will be engaged in learning the 3 essay writing structures, specifically, literary essay, persuasive essay and argumentative essay. Students will be able to raise level of essay writing by working on structure, development and language conventions. The informational TCRWP Non Fiction/ Informational Continuum will be used to assess student writing and lift quality of writing. The culmination of the program will consist of a celebration of student work. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The analysis of the NYSITELL test results show that the Entering new admits were able to demonstrate literacy exposure. However, according to the TCRWP they need to learn letters and sounds, need to know both capital and lower case letters and need to develop a word bank of high frequency words. Running Records indicate that they lack early reading strategies, have little or no comprehension nor rich conversational skills. Our children who do speak some English demonstrate a knowledge of a social language that is basic and fundamental to surviving in their community. They also show difficulties answering literal and inferential questions. The students who fall within the Emergent, Transitional and Expanding category demonstrate some exposure to books, reading and writing.Additionally, their expressive and receptive skills are more developed. Entering ELL's in Grades 3-5 demonstrate that they had prior schooling in their native country, therefore, they possess the skills, content knowledge and background knowledge that facilitates their participation in learning the language as they work alongside their English speaking counterparts. These children are supported both, in the stand-alone and integrated model within the context of their classrooms. Students are supported in the following ways: instruction is scaffolded and differentiated to meet their needs, the content is presented in a comprehensible yet thought-provoking manner, the texts are being unpacked, and a high quality-high interest authentic literature is used to teach English within the content areas. In addition, complex texts and texts with sophisticated vocabulary are carefully chosen in order to teach the academic language, build vocabulary, increase comprehension, (Tier II and III words, shades of meaning, figurative language and complex ideas).Besides scaffolding, instruction is highly differentiated. Our ELL's benefit from the use of graphic organizers, thematic word walls, note taking techniques, bilingual dictionaries, personal word banks in all content areas, and, when necessary, the ENL teacher assists the children in their own language. Our staff/teachers speak Spanish, Russian, Ukrainian, Albanian, Slovak, Polish, Arabic and Turkish, Azerbaijani, Serbian/Croatian/Bosnian, Punjabi and when needed and to our best ability, children are supported in 2018-19 CEP 133  both, English and their native language. Our observations show that when it comes to test taking, majority of our ELL's choose to take the test in English only. This clearly shows that by the time they approach upper grades, they become more English dominant and possess stronger language skills. The classroom teachers employ ENL methodologies in the classroom, children work in small cooperative groups as well as one-on-one during conferencing. This way, students are supported according to their needs. Our Entering and Emerging ELL's need to build a strong body of knowledge as they become more proficient in the English language. We continue to support this group with a stand-alone and an integrated model of instruction and make sure that every child receives the mandated time and delivery model with the mandated number of units in ENL, ELA, and content areas (math, social studies and science). As outlined in the new CR Part 154 as the mandates for the ELL students. Students are serviced by certified ENL teachers in collaboration with classroom teachers and content area teachers.We will continue to grow and strengthen their rigorous academic program and will continue to develop their academic language in reading, writing and math with the expectation that more and more students will obtain proficiency. Our focus for grades K-2 will be expressive and receptive language development and in grades 3-5 reading complex text and writing that is structured will be the focus. In addition, ELL students will work in small, flexible groups, engage in work that is carefully monitored through one-on-one conferencing, differentiated instruction, and the use of ENL materials such as visuals, and artifacts to build prior knowledge, lift understanding and deepen skills.Based on our observations after the NYSITELL we have concluded that many of the students are able to answer factual questions, identify letters and have the vocabulary that enables them to point and identify items on a page. We have noticed that the number of students at the Entering level have decreased and the number of Emerging/Transitioning students have increased. In fact, the number of Expanding ELL's has increased significantly in the past several years, and many students skipped a proficiency level and moved from Entering to Expanding. This is a testament to our rigorous Freestanding ENL Program and our instructional program , which ensure that the needs of all students, inclusive of our ELL students, are met.Furthermore, students in grades 3-5 will engage in reading and writing activities that will help them learn how to accumulate text, respond to text in critical analysis of the story plot and will implement self-assessment and success criteria by using grade level progressions. In writing, they will be engaged in learning the three essay writing structures, specifically, literary essay, persuasive essay and argumentative essay. Students will be able to raise level of essay writing by working on structure, development and language conventions. The informational TCRWP Non Fiction/ Informational Continuum will be used to assess student writing and lift quality of writing. The culmination of the program will consist of a celebration of student work. Additionally, our ELL's are invited to attend a wide range of instructional support groups with focus on reading, writing, math, and the arts. While some programs serve as remediation and offer extra practice, other programs enrich students' lives and broaden their horizons, offering all children opportunities to learn how to express themselves through dance, and theater.The AIS support service is available for our ELL's to receive assistance in small reading and math groups that are fluid and serviced within the classroom. Also, targeted children, inclusive of the Commanding ELL's who attained proficiency are grouped according to their needs and serviced during the Integrated ENL instruction in order to build English language skills through content area instruction in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies in a co-teaching model. Moreover, our K-2 ELL's are invited to attend the Immigrant AIS Reading program, and the Orton Gillingham which is offered 2 times a week for an hour and provides children with the opportunity to develop/strengthen their literacy skills. They are also invited to participate in the Immigrant Early Reading Program. In addition to this, students in K-2 participate in a new enrichment, computer-based, interactive program; Math Seeds, and Reading Eggs, which allows them to practice their math skills and literacy skills, respectively. Also, children in upper grades are offered a new enrichment, computer-based, interactive program; Reflex Math, which allows them to practice their math skills (for an hour), monitor their progress and make improvements each time they complete an assignment.All children, inclusive of current and Commanding ELL's are invited to participate in the following programs throughout the day, before, after school and on Saturdays: Early Grade Exploration Academy for grades K-1. This program is offered once a week for two hours. Saturday Test Practice Academy for grades 3-5, and after-school is the CASA Grant - Dance and Theater program, Title III Program from Grades K-2 and 3-5 - an after-school program. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In our school, the road to every child's success begins even before they enter their classrooms. It is very important to note that we all work in collaboration with each other and communicate/articulate constantly. Collaboratively and cooperatively, as a team, we are engaged in a decision making process to implement interventions, monitor progress, make data-based decisions that are multi-tiered. RTI is a school-wide movement, applied to all students to meet their needs. Stakeholders 2018-19 CEP 134  involved in the process of identifying, discussing and designing action plans for the targeted students in the RTI are: teachers from every grade level, parents, ENL teacher, reading specialist, social worker, school leaders and the school based support team. Our special education teachers consult with classroom teachers regarding effective intervention methods, interpreting data, setting appropriate student goals, ensuring appropriate referral procedures and supporting targeted classroom instruction. In addition, school psychologist, social worker and speech language pathologist also have important roles in the decision-making process. They assist with comprehensive assessments, interpreting data, incorporate families into the process and share their expertise in language development. Our parents and families play a crucial role in this process. They provide insight about their child's previous schooling experiences, language experiences, their cultural values and norms as well as interactions with community members and experiences outside of school. Our parents assist in planning learning and behavioral goals that are appropriate for their children and will foster their academic achievement. We make sure that we provide targeted children with high quality instruction, tiered layers of instructional support and a variety of positive learning experiences so they can succeed in school. We use the RTI problem solving model, best practices and current research. We gather as much information about our learners as possible so that their specific needs can be met and the right support can be provided to improve our ELL's academic outcomes. We make sure that every child in our care is offered sufficient time, variety of instructional support and interventions before referring them further. Once a student is identified as needing additional support the following RTI structures are implemented; Tier I is the core of instruction and is delivered to all students in the classroom. This includes evidence-based instruction that has been shown to be effective for ELL's and differentiation to meet students' diverse needs. This level of instruction is followed by Tier II, where in addition to the core instruction, targeted students receive extra support in areas of need in small groups or one on one. This type of instruction is research-based and includes intervention strategies and best practices. The last Tier III is an intensive and individualized instruction that is offered to a small group of students or one-on-one outside of the classroom structure, it could be an additional period of AIS. In some cases if we note that a child is not making progress, we usually contact the parents so that additional testing can take place. For each ELL student who scores below specified levels of performance on the NYSESLAT, we, as a team, determine the additional support services to provide the student. These support services are aligned to all the intervention plans for that child. We take in consideration all the information we gather. This information includes but not limited to:-The number of years the child has been receiving ENL instruction-English and Home Language literacy-If a child is a SIFE (we don't currently have any children with interrupted formal education in grades 3-5), if there are needs of the socio-emotional nature and content area needs-If a child is a long term ELL, what are his/her English and Home Language literacy needs-NYSESLAT test results-ENL teacher recommendation-Classroom teacher and content area teacher recommendation-Parent or guardian request-Sample of student work in English and in the home language (if possible)-Bilingual educational evaluation (if the student has or is suspected of having a disability) 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL and NYSESLAT test results indicate that out of 87 ELL's, 9 students are at the Entering level, 10 are at the Emerging level, 14 are at the Transitioning level, 41 are at the Expanding level and 13 are at the Commanding-Proficient level. The 9 students who tested at the Entering level are the newcomers who are brand new admits to the NYC public school system and who came in later in the school year. They were immediately assessed, NYSITELL'd, placed appropriately according to their language proficiency levels and the parent program selection choices. These students were immediately provided a rigorous ELL support in English and across the content areas. Even though, the 4th grader was exempt from taking the NY State ELA test, he took the NY State Math test in his Home Language (with a translator) and scored a level 4 which indicates that he has a strong subject acquisition. Once again, this is a testament to our rigorous curriculum and our rigorous ENL program. The analysis of the NYSITELL test results show that the Entering new admits were able to demonstrate literacy exposure.However, according to the TCRWP they need to learn letters and sounds, need to know both capital and lower case letters and need to develop a word bank of high frequency words. Running Records indicate that they lack early reading strategies, have little or no comprehension nor rich conversational skills. Our children who do speak some English demonstrate a knowledge of a social language that is basic and fundamental to surviving in their community. They also show difficulties answering literal and inferential questions.The students who fall within the Emergent, Transitional and Expanding category demonstrate some exposure to books, reading and writing. In addition, their expressive and receptive skills are more developed. Entering ELL's in Grades 3-5 demonstrate that they had prior schooling in their native country, therefore, they possess the skills, content knowledge and background knowledge that facilitates their participation in learning the language as they work alongside their 2018-19 CEP 135  English speaking counterparts. These children are supported both, in the stand-alone and integrated model within the context of their classrooms. Students are supported in the following ways: instruction is scaffolded and differentiated to meet their needs, the content is presented in a comprehensible yet thought-provoking manner, the texts are being unpacked, and a high quality-high interest authentic literature is used to teach English within the content areas. In addition, complex texts and texts with sophisticated vocabulary are carefully chosen in order to teach the academic language, build vocabulary, increase comprehension, (Tier II and III words, shades of meaning, figurative language and complex ideas). Besides scaffolding, instruction is highly differentiated. Our ELL's benefit from the use of graphic organizers, thematic word walls, note taking techniques, bilingual dictionaries, personal word banks in all content areas, and, when necessary, the ENL teacher assists the children in their own language.Moreover, our staff/teachers speak Spanish, Russian, Ukranian, Albanian, Slovak, Polish, Arabic and Turkish, and when needed and to our best ability, children are supported in both English, and their native language. Our observations show that when it comes to test taking, majority of our ELL's choose to take the test in English only. This clearly shows that by the time they approach upper grades, they become more English dominant and possess stronger language skills. The classroom teachers employ ENL methodologies in the classroom, children work in small cooperative groups as well as one-on-one during conferencing. This way, students are supported according to their needs. Our Entering and Emerging ELL's need to build a strong body of knowledge as they become more proficient in the English language. We continue to support this group with a stand-alone and an integrated model of instruction and make sure that every child receives the mandated time and delivery model with the mandated number of units in ENL, ELA, and content areas (math, social studies and science). As outlined in the new CR Part 154 as the mandates for the ELL students are as follows:-Entering Level Students: 180 min. of standalone services, 180 min. of integrated services, and 180 min. of standalone or integrated services in content areas (a total of 360 min. a week).-Emerging ELL's : 90 min. of standalone services, 180 min. of integrated services, and 90 min. of standalone or integrated services within content areas (total of 360 min per week)-Transitioning ELL's; they are not mandated to receive any standalone services, 90 min. of integrated services in ENL or other content areas, 90 min. of standalone or integrated services in content areas besides ELA total of 90 min, (180 min. per week). -Expanding ELL students are mandated 180 minutes of integrated ENL services.-Commanding students are mandated to receive 90 minutes of language support per week for an additional 2 years in content areas as an integrated service.Students are serviced by certified ENL teachers in collaboration with classroom teachers and content area teachers. We will continue to grow and strengthen their rigorous academic program and will continue to develop their academic language in reading, writing and math with the expectation that more and more students will obtain proficiency. Our focus for grades K-2 will be expressive and receptive language development and in grades 3-5 reading complex text and writing that is structured will be the focus. In addition, ELL students will work in small, flexible groups, engage in work that is carefully monitored through one-on-one conferencing, differentiated instruction, and the use of ENL materials such as visuals, and artifacts to build prior knowledge, lift understanding and deepen skills.Based on our observations after the NYSITELL we have concluded that many of the students are able to answer factual questions, identify letters and have the vocabulary that enables them to point and identify items on a page. We have noticed that the number of students at the Entering level have decreased and the number of Emerging/Transitioning students have increased. In fact, the number of Expanding ELL's has increased significantly in the past several years, and many students skipped a proficiency level and moved from Entering to Expanding. This is a testament to our rigorous Freestanding ENL Program and our instructional program , which ensure that the needs of all students, inclusive of our ELL students, are met. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All information and data is shared with staff, parents, and the community. This is achieved through staff meetings, parental engagement times, workshops, professional developments, parent teacher conferences, parents-as-learning-partners-days, and through team inquiry. We disseminate our findings in order to make adjustments to our programs. We present our data and explain the results to staff, parents, school leadership team, school improvement team, school instructional team, PTA and inquiry teams. We also ask for parental and teacher feedback through surveys and information learned through all communication with parents. Additionally we ask for student reflections and future suggestions for improvement. We also relay information on our school website and through newsletters, phone calls, emails, and school events. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 136  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our school, we offer a Freestanding ENL program. As soon as we receive the NYSESLAT scores and have the NYSITELL scores available, we will have the right data to review and to form groups for instruction. At this time, we have 2 full time ENL teachers who services all ELL's according to the new service models and time allocations. After going through an appeal due to failing to meet the needs of all our ELL students (based on CR part 154) we managed to get the funds to hire an additional certified ENL teacher. At this time, we are in compliance in providing all our ELL students with mandated services including the time allocations. Our ENL teachers continue to articulate with classroom teachers and provide them with tools, resources and PD opportunities they can use with their ELL's and continue supporting them within their classrooms. The data from the NYSESLAT and the proficiency levels help us appropriately identify students who tested out on the NYSESLAT, who is eligible to continue to be entitled to ELL services. This information helps us group students, provide them the required time, offer them the necessary model of instruction as well as all the additional support they need during English Native Language instruction and during content instruction. The groups will be flexible and ENL Strategies and Methods will be up front and centered. Instruction will be scaffolded and differentiated. The ENL Teacher will provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. As mentioned previously, our ENL program employs stand-alone ENL instruction and the Integrated ENL instruction. Students develop English Language skills so that they can succeed in core content courses and build English language skills through content area instruction in ELA, Math, science and social studies. We follow the protocol to service our ELL's as outlined in the new guidelines to the best of our ability and to ensure that: Entering ELL's receive 360 minutes of instruction per week (180 minutes of stand-alone instruction and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction). Emerging ELL's receive 360 minutes of instruction per week (90 minutes of stand-alone instruction, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Transitioning ELL's receive 180 minutes of instruction per week (90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Expanding ELL's receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction. Commanding ELL's - 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction per week where students are supported within the context of the classroom setting to ensure that all curricular decisions are based on the child's second language development. Teachers deliver instruction in a collaborative co-teaching and team teaching model where content is presented by both teachers, the parallel model where the ENL teacher delivers the lessons taught in the classroom in a stand-alone model using ENL best practices, methodology, scaffolds and supports aimed at addressing the needs of the students. Articulation between the classroom teachers and the ENL teacher is on-going. Planning and Professional development time is used to look at data, student writing, formal and informal observations, to look for patterns and common threads, to perfect our practice and to research and share best practices and engage in the shared decision making process to better instruction and improve academic achievement of the students. All instructional decisions are made to better address the needs of our ELL's. b. TBE program. If applicable. At this time we do not have the TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. At this time we do not have the DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All instructional minutes delivered/modeled explicitly and rigorously. All Units of study are taught to students grouped according to their language proficiency level and grade level and instruction is delivered by certified ENL teachers who will 2018-19 CEP 137  teach in collaboration with the core teacher, a dually certified or a bilingually certified teacher (bilingual or TESOL extension). This year, our groups will include students grouped in one grade/proficiency level groups as well as in combined 2 contiguous grades in order to adhere to the mandated time allocations as per the new CR Part 154. All ENL classes have Integrated and Standalone models and will offer home language support. Our Entering ELL's will receive 2 units of study per week (540 minutes): 1 unit of study in stand-alone ENL (180 minutes) and 2 unit of study in Integrated ENL/ELA (360 minutes). Our Emerging ELL's receive 2 units of study per week (360 minutes): 0.5 units of study in ENL (90 minutes) in Stand-Alone ENL, 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA (180 minutes) in Integrated ENL model and 0.5 units of study with flexibility of Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/ELA/Content Area such as ELA, math, science or social studies (90 minutes). Our Transitioning ELL's receive 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes): 0.5 units of study in Integrated ENL/ELA (90 minutes), and 0.5 units of study with flexibility of Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area (90 minutes). Our Expanding ELL's will receive 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes): 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA or other Content Area (180 minutes) in Integrated model of instruction. Our Commanding students who attained Proficiency and tested out of the NYSESLAT in 2 previous years, will receive 0.5 units of study per week of Integrated ENL in ELA or Content Area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. This year, in compliance with the new mandates, the ENL program is delivered to students through stand-alone ENL with parallel teaching of Units of study during the literacy block and though integrated ENL model in core curriculum in ELA, math, social studies and science. All content is taught in English with support in native language. The programs we use in our school are Columbia University's Teacher's College Reading and Writing project. The Units of study are highly differentiated to meet the linguistic needs of our ELL's and to provide necessary additional supports to our Commanding ELL's. In math, the Go Math program offers support for English Language Learners, including content specific vocabulary and visuals. The program also contains online resources in Spanish for parental support at home. Similarly, the social studies and science content is highly differentiated and is taught through meaningful, rich experiences, hands-on and inquiry-based activities, supported by authentic informational texts that provide variety, complexity and sophistication to meet the linguistic demands of our ELL's and former ELL's and to enrich their vocabulary they can build and apply across contents. All Units of study across grade levels and content areas are rigorously planned by our teachers and support specialists, including the ENL teacher. We use backward planning to identify what background knowledge our ELL's require and what additional tools, resources and vocabulary needs they might have so the content is delivered and learned with high efficiency and success. In addition, the classroom teacher and the ENL teachers co-teach using methodologies and best practices for ELL's that provide for small group and one on one support, modeling, word problem scaffolding and the use of manipulatives. Students and teachers create whole group and individualized math, social studies and science word walls and word banks with examples, visuals and steps to show the problem solving process. Students role play/act out the solutions, newly acquired knowledge and use the new academic content vocabulary to write, illustrate and orally present their thinking, which helps us, teachers in assessing the students progress throughout the year in the modalities of reading, writing, speaking and listening. Students are modeled a variety of problem solving strategies, including identifying the most important information and what the question is asking to do. From that, the students learn to circle and underline/highlight information in text and use pictures, tally marks, number lines, and other graphic organizers to make content comprehensible and to increase their repertoire of strategies. Students are immersed in print and language rich environments, which allow them to build their schema not only from literature but also from ongoing field trips and hands on activities throughout the year. Instructional strategies are highly differentiated and aim to increase reading comprehension and writing skills, as well as critical thinking and speaking skills. Scaffolding is highly used in instruction for ELL's Modeling, Bridging, Contextualization, Schema Building, Metacognitive Development and Text Representation are the types of instructional strategies on which instruction is based. In addition, strategies and skills that the ENL Teacher attained at QTEL and BETAQ workshops are highly implemented during instruction at all grade levels. Some methods and approaches integrated within our practice are sheltered English, the unpacking of text by introducing "juicy words, juicy phrases, juicy language", developing theories of characters in book clubs and the use of the Depth of Knowledge and Bloom's taxonomy to foster high order thinking skills. Moreover, there is consistent articulation between ENL /general ed/ special ed./ and related service personnel. ELLs are a consistent focus on Inquiry Teams, SAT Teams, as we are always thinking of the research based best practices and approaches that best fit the needs of our ELL Students. Moreover, I want to reiterate that we strictly adhere to the mandated time allocations and program models, stand-alone with parallel teaching by 2018-19 CEP 138  a certified ENL teacher and integrated ENL/content area instruction is delivered in a collaborative teaching model with emphasis on small group and one on one differentiated instruction is applied to all proficiency levels inclusive of our commanding (former) ELL's. Once again, the content teachers receive on-going, sustainable and carefully planned professional development and support of the ENL teacher to better address the needs of all students inclusive of ELL's, students with disabilities and Commanding ELL's. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At our school, we only have a Freestanding ENL program as reflected in the Parent program selection forms and chosen by our parents. Therefore, we do not assess children using diagnostic assessment tools for native language in TBE / DL programs, however if the situation ever arises we will make sure to access the diagnostic assessment tools necessary for placement. The only Native Language assessment tool we use is the Spanish LAB administered to all newly identified ELL's during the time of initial enrollment. It serves as a diagnostic assessment of language dominance to support our Spanish-speaking ELL's as we plan and differentiate instruction. we understand and value the importance of supporting students' native language and offer them with language support in the classroom. We offer multilingual and multicultural libraries and dictionaries/glossaries to our students, we also utilize the technology, the Internet, video and audio materials to assist our ELL's with native language support. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFEs may come from countries where poverty, disaster, and civil unrest affect the development of literacy and opportunities for education. They may also come from countries where persecution or strict rules about gender, social class, or ethnicity prevented them from attending school. According to UNICEF and UNESCO, as of 2006, 93 million children of primary school age were not attending school (UNICEF Global Databases, 2007; and UNESCO Institute for Statistics, Global Education Digest, 2007). This number has decreased from 115 million children in 2002, but the unfortunate reality is that many children around the world still aren't receiving an education. Gender inequities are also more prevalent than we might suspect: girls in one third of the world's nations still don't have equal access to education (UNICEF global databases, 2007), which is particularly concerning in nations where girls can only attend classes taught by women. These statistics remind us that when students who have grown up with little or no education experience enroll in U.S. schools, they have much more to learn than just the English language; in order to be fully functional at school, they must learn how to read, how to complete assignments and follow instructions, how to use school supplies, how to follow a school schedule, how to take the bus, how to interact with students from different cultures, and how to participate in school activities — all while adjusting to a new country and new social norms, and possibly taking on family responsibilities such as working, caring for younger siblings, or doing a significant share of housework. SIFEs may also have been born or raised in a developed nation but in impoverished circumstances that affect their family's stability. For example, many migrant workers in the U.S. move frequently based on agricultural seasons, and as a result their children move from one to school to another, making it nearly impossible for children to stay caught up with their peers. While needs of the SIFE population may overlap with those of English language learners (ELLs) in general, SIFEs are likely to need additional support and instruction in basic skills for a number of reasons (Office of English Language Learning & Migrant Education, 2008, p.1): 1. Stress: A student's formal education may have been interrupted by migration, war, lack of access to education, and/or socioeconomic or cultural circumstances (p.1). As a result, the student may suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder, may be under severe distress, or may be completely overwhelmed by the need to assimilate to a new school environment in a new language.2. Literacy and academic gaps: Students may not be able to read or write in their native language, and may also lack an understanding of the basic concepts, content knowledge, and critical thinking skills that their peers will have mastered (p.1). This situation presents a challenge to educators because,On the one hand, these learners require instruction in the basic concepts and skills necessary for academic success, including how to study and take notes, and how to participate in class discussions. On the other hand, their academic success rests on meeting increasingly sophisticated standards and English-2018-19 CEP 139  language assessments. So, even when students are not fluent in English or are not formally educated, rather than focusing exclusively on basic and/or remedial skills, it is important to offer lessons designed to develop critical knowledge, using content that reflects students' lives, interests and culture. (DiCerbo and Loop, 2003)3. Frustration: A SIFE may be very excited to finally attend school regularly, and may have high hopes for his ability to work and support his family; however, the discovery that he is in fact far behind his peers can be a source of great frustration. Even as he makes great academic progress throughout the year, he is still chasing a moving target because English-speaking, grade-level peers are continuing to learn as well, and the realization that meeting his goals will be harder than expected may be devastating.4. High risk of dropping out: SIFEs are considered to have a high risk for dropping out of high school given the precarious nature of their relationship with school as indicated by this statistic: "At-risk Hispanic students aged 16-19 who judged themselves as not speaking English well were four times more likely to drop out of high school than were their peers who spoke English well." (Fry, 2003 as cited in Spaulding, Carolino & Amen, 2004, p.8)While these reasons present numerous challenges to school educators and administrators, students with limited or interrupted schooling can succeed if their school makes a commitment to help them achieve that goal. The following lists of suggestions offer some ideas that educators can implement to support SIFEs throughout the school and in the classroom.The majority of our SIFE arrive at our schools with low or no literacy skills in any language. Some are behind in content knowledge for their age and pose great challenges for educators. They also may have complex social and psychological needs due to traumatic migration experiences, frustrations with their academic delays in relation to their peers, a lack of familiarity with school culture, and isolation in school. Many of these students, with their complex needs, often do not to get the support they require in school and make little or no progress. Some may eventually drop out of school.The Office of Bilingual Education and World Languages (OBEWL) has valuable resources designed to support districts and schools in the education of Students with Interrupted/Inconsistent Formal Education (SIFE). Among these resources, which are described below, are: a SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire and Guidance, the Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener (MLS) assessment portal and guidance, a Writing Screener, a Frequently Asked Questions document, and a SIFE Identification flow chart.The MLS is a state-wide diagnostic tool that was created to determine SIFEs' literacy levels in their home language in order to provide or to design appropriate instruction for these students. New York is one of the first states to propose the use of a diagnostic tool for this population of students. We believe that meeting the needs of SIFE is a considerable challenge, but it is one that must be met in order to provide real opportunities to these students.The SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire is an instrument designed to help gather more information about potential SIFE and provides the school with an opportunity to learn more about the student's family and home background, educational history, and literacy practices. Guidance to the Oral Interview Questionnaire is also available. The SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire and Guidance documents are currently available in English and in the following languages that are the top spoken by the state’s SIFE, listed here alphabetically: Arabic, Bengali/Bangla, Chinese-Simplified, Haitian Creole, S’gaw Karen, Maay Maay, Spanish, and Urdu.SIFE Writing tool - The purpose of this tool is to quickly identify students’ basic writing skills as another data point to assist with the screening of potential SIFE. This tool can be administered to a group, and students should be given a maximum of 15 minutes to complete their writing. Writing Screeners are available in the following languages: Arabic, Bengali/Bangla, Chinese-Simplified, English, Haitian-Creole, S’gaw Karen, Maay Maay, Spanish, and Urdu.A one page flow chart that outlines the steps involved in identifying Students with Interrupted/Inconsistent Formal Education, as outlined in Part 154 of the Regulations of the Commissioner of Education.The MLS is a multilingual set of diagnostics designed to inform teachers and administrators of the home-language literacy skills their students bring with them when they begin schooling in New York State. The MLS is also a semi-adaptive online diagnostic that reflects current literature-based curricula and didactic principles from students’ home countries for grades three through nine. The tool is currently available in Arabic, Bangla, Chinese, English, Haitian Creole, Karen, Maay Maay, and Spanish and may be available in more languages in the future as needed. All sections have been produced by literacy experts, writers, and editors who are native speakers of the above languages. In conjunction with the New York State SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire as well as the Writing Screener, the MLS is an additional tool to be used in determining if a newly arrived English Language Learner is designated as SIFE. For more information about the MLS, read the MLS User Manual.Our School supports SIFEs in a number of ways.1. Build supportive environments that respond to the immediate social, cultural, and linguistic needs of immigrant adolescents with limited schooling (Spaulding, Carolino & Amen, 2004, p.11). An educational environment that is supportive of SIFEs will have staff members who are well-educated on the needs and backgrounds of their students, and highly attuned to the emotional strain these students may experience as they adjust to a new country, language, and customs. Students may be facing complex identity issues, culture shock, and a sense of loss of having left their home behind, particularly if they didn't want to move to a new country (p. 12).A supportive environment is often created by one or more of the following:1. bilingual/bicultural staff from the students' home country2. a 2018-19 CEP 140  teaching staff highly trained in cross-cultural communication, the cultural and historical backgrounds of the students, and instructional methods that are designed to accelerate the academic achievement of SIFEs.3. student and parent access to support services (ideally in the family's native language) provided by counselors, tutors, mentors, and parent coordinators. (Walsh, 1991, as cited in Office of English Language Learning & Migrant Education, p. 10)4. a buddy system with peers or classmates who can show students around and help them adjust to the daily schedule (p.4)2. Implement newcomer centers and/or programs to ease transitions for newly immigrated students (Spaulding, Carolino & Amen, p.11). Newcomer centers and programs are very effective when a district needs to meet the needs of many SIFEs. A newcomer center may provide numerous services included in the newcomer program, such as academic support, language instruction, an introduction to basic school activities and skills, and community resources for immigrant families (p.13). Enrollment in a newcomer program, which is often transitional, allows the student time to adjust to the U.S. educational system in a supportive environment with instructors who understand their needs and have been specially trained to assist in accelerating SIFEs' academic achievement while monitoring cultural and emotional adjustments.Even as SIFEs learn the basics such as the alphabet or how to hold a pencil, they can also begin developing academic content concepts and language through bilingual or sheltered instruction content courses. When SIFEs leave an effective program at a newcomer center after 1-2 years and transition to a mainstream educational environment, they will be much better prepared to participate successfully.3. Create collaboration models across high school academic departments to support simultaneous linguistic and academic development (p. 11). A collaborative instructional model reinforces student learning and accelerates SIFEs' academic progress. For elementary-level teachers this may come more easily since classroom teachers are responsible for more than one subject, and they often work collaboratively in grade-level teams. For secondary-level teachers this may be more challenging and may require a review of the instructional system, curriculum and content, school resources, and teacher planning schedules (Office of English Language Learning & Migrant Education, p.1).In the National Clearinghouse for English Language Acquisition's Interrupted Formal Schooling Toolkit, DiCerbo and Loop write, "Schools that are prepared to meet the needs of students with interrupted formal education do not require classroom teachers or individual resource teachers to take on these responsibilities alone. Instead, administrators, counselors, classroom teachers and resource teachers need to work together to ensure that the students and their families have the necessary information needed to provide school supplies, documentation for meal programs, and other requisites for assimilation. Working together to create a climate of acceptance and accountability ensures that the student's academic success is secured on many levels." (2003)Regardless of how the collaboration is done or at what grade level, the important thing for teachers to keep in mind is how to continually reinforce new concepts and language in academic instruction and integrate concepts across content areas and language/literacy classes. For example, if students are learning about aquatic life in science, the math teacher can teach mathematical examples that reinforce the scientific concepts while applying math skills, and the language arts teacher can review the language structures and vocabulary used in the math problems and science lessons being taught. Teachers who collaborate have the opportunity to be intentional about the academic language and skills they want students to learn and practice, and they will begin to make connections across content areas to reinforce learning.4. Increase sheltered instruction (Office of English Language Learning & Migrant Education, p.2). Often when SIFE student enroll in a U.S. school, the gaps in their educational record lead to them being placed in remedial courses. While this kind of instruction may be necessary or helpful for some students, native-language instruction and sheltered instruction may provide a viable alternative to remedial instruction (Spaulding, Carolino & Amen, p.13).Sheltered instruction is English-language instruction that is modified so that subject matter is more comprehensible to students with limited vocabularies (American Federation of Teachers, 2002). Sheltered instruction strategies may include the increased use of visuals, collaborative learning activities, and demonstrations (Office of English Language Learning & Migrant Education, p.2).5. Consider how standards and the curriculum can be adapted so that SIFEs learn critical material in a way that is effective, accessible, and age-appropriate (Office of English Language Learning & Migrant Education, 3). Even though state-wide standards in their original format may be too advanced for SIFEs, it is possible to adapt standards-based lessons so that they cover the most important information in a way that is accessible, culturally relevant, and age-appropriate. The Office of English Language Learning & Migrant Education offers this example:Instead of giving a 2nd-grade book to a 17-year-old immigrant from Ghana who reads at a 2nd-grade level, a teacher might work, for example, with the social studies instructor and provide the student with ESL materials on U.S. history. (p.3)Schools may also consider using thematic curriculum, individual learning plans, or alternative ways of gaining course credit (such as an independent study or an internship) (Walsh, 1991, as cited in Office of English Language Learning & Migrant Education, p. 10).6. Provide intensive literacy/language instruction. Many researchers and educators are implementing new programs designed to teach adolescent readers the basics of literacy (Office of English Language Learning & Migrant Education, p.6). Among some of the most important recommendations include explicit 2018-19 CEP 141  instruction in an age-appropriate manner of the five components of reading - phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension(p.7), increasing student access to literacy-rich environments and print materials, and unifying language and content instruction (Spaulding, Carolino & Amen, p.30). SIFEs may also benefit from increased time in language development or ESL courses, particularly if the class sizes are small.7. Teach students learning strategies that they can use in the future. These strategies may include how to recognize cognates, looking for the heading of a chapter in pre-reading exercises, using a dictionary, or how to take effective notes (p. 28). Remember that SIFEs haven't learned the basic skills that many students have learned at a young age, and may have no background knowledge in the areas that you expect them to have learned.8. Use resources of the community to support immigrant students (Spaulding, Carolino & Amen, p. 11). Community resources can be a very powerful tool in meeting the needs of SIFEs. The saying, "It takes a whole village to raise a child" became popular for a reason - it's true. SIFEs will benefit greatly from contacts with community resources such as health care organizations, after-school tutoring, job programs, and ethnically/linguistically based community groups. Isolation and discouragement can be two negative and powerful influences on a SIFE student's education. The more SIFEs feel connected and supported, the more likely they will be to rebound from health, economic, or cultural challenges. A Newcomer Center is often well-connected with such community resources and likely offers community organization services on-site to the students.To see examples of programs that implement the best practices listed above, please view The Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) report cited in this article, Immigrant Students and Secondary School Reform: Compendium of Best Practices by Spaulding, Carolino & Amen and read the SIFE program descriptions. Effective Programs for English Language Learners (ELL) with Interrupted Formal Education from the Office of English Language Learning & Migrant Education at the Indiana Department of Education also offers more specific suggestions on support SIFE instruction in literacy and math.SIFEs will flourish in an educational environment that is reflective of their academic and cultural needs, with an emphasis on intentional instruction to enrich their knowledge.Moreover, there are many things we do in our classroom:1. Activate prior knowledge. Once you know what prior information your students have, then you want to link the new information to what they already understand. Not only can this stimulate student motivation, but it can also determine where to start instruction as well as lay out the next steps. Some strategies include: word associations, word-splash relationships, KWL charts, and anticipation guides.2. Provide a print rich environment. Cover your walls with lots of visuals that correspond to text (maps, charts, signs, posters with motivational phrases, the alphabet in print and script, the Pledge of Allegiance, etc.). Seek out appropriate lower-grade texts or texts that are written for a lower reading level, high interest, low ability books, native language materials, and bilingual glossaries.3. Engage students in hands-on learning so students are physically involved. Have students write, illustrate, and record their own books, let them create their own picture dictionaries and flash cards, incorporate drama to act out events and stories, use interactive activities on a SMARTBoard, use manipulatives, reciprocal teaching, and teach to the multiple intelligences.4. Keep the amount of new vocabulary in control. When using new vocabulary or explaining new concepts, you may need to rephrase, define in context, and simplify your explanation so as not to confuse students. Limit your sentence length, but don't patronize students by raising your voice as if they were hard of hearing. Instead, use intonation and pauses for emphasis.5. Give frequent checks for communication. Try to avoid Yes/No answers. Instead, ask that students summarize what they understood. Increase your wait time, because students will need extra time to process your question, think of the answer, they find the words they need in English.6. When assessing understanding, be open-minded. Provide multiple opportunities to demonstrate understanding (instead of writing: explain, act out, discuss, defend, draw, compare, predict, etc.). Emphasize formative assessment versus evaluative assessment and individualize what you ask students to do.7. Allow students to work in cooperative groups. Remember to teach the necessary social skills they need to interact productively with one another. Forming skills such as getting into groups, taking turns, and encouraging one another provide the foundation for higher-order thinking in collaborative groups.8. If possible, build the native language content and literacy instruction in order to build on English. Otherwise, work on pre-reading, during reading, and post-reading strategies from current trends in literacy. Use of graphic organizers is very helpful to make learning visual and incorporate thinking skills, and can be done without any writing. Use reading logs and journals to incorporate reading and writing.9. Use teaching strategies that weave together language and content instruction, such as the SIOP model (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol). Start with the concrete then build to the abstract. Try to relate material to students' prior knowledge and experience. What they don't have you can try to create for them through visuals or by using technology.10. Keep your expectations realistic at the beginning of the year. Raise your expectations up as students reach them and keep them high enough that students will stretch to reach for them, but not too high that they give up. If you expect success from your students, supply them with the necessary tools, remain optimistic, and offer to help as they need it, they will gain the self-confidence to be successful.As we work with our students, we keep in mind that many came to U.S. ready to get a good 2018-19 CEP 142  education, become successful citizens, and leave a troubled past behind. Many may be discouraged and frightened when they find out exactly what is entailed in order to reach their goals, that is why we are here to help. SIFE-Students with interrupted formal education; as defined by the SED-ELL’s who have entered a US school after second grade; have had at least two years less schooling than their peers; function at least two years below expected grade level in reading and mathematics; and may be pre literate in their first language. We have 30 school days from initial enrollment to make an initial SIFE determination. Students who are newly identified ELL's, in grades 3 and up and are at the beginner/entering or low intermediate/emerging level of proficiency as indicated by the NYSITELL results will go through the SIFE identification process, the administration of the oral interview questionnaire and the Literacy Evaluation for Newcomers SIFE (LENS) for Arabic, Chinese or Spanish speaking ELL's. All appropriate steps are taken to enter the SIFE information into the ATS. As per CR Part 154, we have up to one year to make a final determination of SIFE status. SIFE status is removed once the ELL scores at intermediate/transitioning level or higher on the NYSESLAT. We have no SIFE students however, we are prepared to address the needs of any students who have had interrupted education in the following ways:• Students are received like all other students and go through the process that all other new students to our school go through. The Parents and students are interviewed immediately and all measures and efforts are taken to access information that can assist us in ensuring that the child is appropriately placed. • The Home Language Identification Survey is carefully filled out by the parents (in the language spoken at home), with the assistance of the certified ELL coordinator in the parent's home language and in English. Immediately following this, the child is NYSITELL'd, any child who scores at or below proficiency in the NYSITELL and speaks Spanish will be LAB R’d in Spanish. Our goal is to determine their language dominance in order to better support the student, to enrich instruction and to provide native language supports. Immediately following the parent orientation the child is placed in a program of the parent’s choice for the duration of one year. According to the new mandates, if the child needs to exempt from the ELA, he/she will be administered the math and grade 4 science tests and the NYSESLAT in lieu of the ELA. In addition, a new exiting criteria will be applied to all ELL's in testing grades 3-5 for all ELL's attaining Commanding on the NYSESLAT or Expanding on the NYSESLAT and a score of 3 or more on the ELA.• Our instructional goal with SIFE students is to engulf them in a risk free environment that promotes student learning and social interaction. Noting that many times they are 2 or more levels behind, the goal is to target their academic needs rigorously and ensure that the support provided is long lasting. Bilingual materials will be made available for them such as; dictionaries, glossaries, native language materials in content areas, as well as the use of visuals and manipulatives. Instruction is differentiated depending on student needs, small group, and one on one instruction is provided. In addition, we group them accordingly for extended day AIS and for any tutorial programs we have that we feel they will benefit from.• Students found to need additional support services such as speech, OT, PT, counseling will be referred for further evaluation so that their needs will be addressed. Instruction for newcomers is rigorous and language rich. Students are immersed in academic and social language through out the school day. Instruction is differentiated in and out of the classroom, and during extended day. For example; children are grouped heterogeneously and all types of visuals, manipulatives, computer software and smart boards are used to promote language acquisition in listening, speaking, reading, writing and thinking. We enhance their background knowledge and schema by immersing them in multi-cultural themes and learning experiences. We also tap into their cultural background knowledge to engage them interactively in rich language experiences that celebrate their cultural differences and similarities. As a school community Cultural Diversity is celebrated in many ways, read alouds, author studies, assemblies, project based learning, music and art. ALL ELL's inclusive of Developing, Long Term and Former ELL's (4 and more years of service) are immersed academically in all school wide instructional programs, activities, trips and events. We have AIS services which provide our ELL students with small group and one on one additional support. For example, Newcomers are grouped for rich language experiences through reader's theater, poetry, songs, music, and art. Our Developing ELL's who have been in the program for more than 4 years are grouped for intensive strategy building and academic driven intervention that is rigorous and aligned to their academic goals. This year we have only one Developing ELL. After reviewing all the data and making decisions on the instructional implications for this child, we identified that one of the major areas for development is the content academic language. A comprehensive intervention plan was put in place in order to meet the needs of our Developing ELL. The lessons and activities were scaffolded and differentiated for her on the instructional level. She learned many necessary skills and strategies to build her academic language and to increase comprehension as well as reading, writing, listening and speaking using a more sophisticated vocabulary, newly learned terminology and in writing, producing longer and much more sophisticated pieces that have a clear structure, paragraphs, evidence rich and show many examples and details to support ideas. In addition, Our Developing ELL, as well as all the other ELL's learned and use content and domain specific vocabulary to improve their questioning, in writing conclusions using Lessons Learned and adding complex thinking and grade appropriate vocabulary. In 2018-19 CEP 143  addition, children learned to use Pushing Our Thinking prompts they used in Socratic Circles, an activity where students are positioned in a circle and each child takes turn to share his/her idea, point of view, thoughts and make a statement about an excerpt read using background knowledge, evidence from text and within a content area. This year, we do not have any Long term ELL's, however, if we do have Long term ELL's next year, we will continue providing them with the rigorous, carefully grouped, strategy and needs-based support they need, which can be in math, science, social studies, reading and/or writing, depending on what the needs are. Our plan for the Long Term ELL's is:Long term ELL’s are carefully monitored by the Inquiry Team. Formal and informal observations by classroom teacher and other staff, intensive intervention, and out reach to families are a few of the methods we use to assess and address the needs of long term ELL’s. When as a school we have exhausted all means of addressing their academic needs, students are referred to the School Assessment Team for an Educational Evaluation. Experience has taught us that many of these students come from homes where the parents lack formal education in their own native language, are functionally literate and parental involvement in school is very limited not because of their limits academically, but because their work schedules consume their lives. Our goal is to find a way to address their needs and the needs of their families. All ELL students are invited to attend the Summer Success Regional Programs. Parents are invited to attend all instructional, curricular workshops provided by the school, local community based organizations and ENL Classes that might be offered locally free of charge. Parents who attend school workshops are given materials to use at home with their children, and translated materials and information are consistently sent home and provided at parent workshops.Our Commanding ELL's up to two years after exiting ELL status are carefully monitored individually and as a group. We will carefully look at data together with the teachers, parents, the Pupil Progress/School Implementation Teams and discuss each child's progress on a personal basis. We will identify their strengths and weaknesses and identify a range of possible interventions and supports for that child to meet his/her goals and address his/her needs. Teachers will continue offering them the native language support and provide them with the tools and resources they need. Our Commanding ELL's will continue to receive testing modifications, time extension and separate location on the ELA, Math and Science tests. This also insures that ELL students with IEP's receive their related service mandates and all IEP goals are met via small group intervention. All modifications for current ELL' s and Commanding ELL's are integrated into the class setting to prepare for test taking, students receive time and a half, separate locations, are allowed to use dictionaries and glossaries. All current and former ELL's with IEP's will have their modifications adhered to at time of testing. All academic support is data driven.A variety of instructional materials will be employed in order to teach the English language in context and to support the English language acquisition, including:-Sanford Harmony- A buddy up program that ensures cultural awareness and encourages students to respect diversity. Materials include songs, books, stories and conversation starters and ice breaker cards.-Book bins-Informational texts-Non-fiction libraries-Bilingual dictionaries-Picture dictionaries-Graphic organizers-Audiovisuals-Realia and manipulatives-Personal word banks-Thematic word walls-Rubrics-Artifacts-Science lab-Science tools and materials Technology:-Smart board-Computer lab and lap tops-Internet-Educational web sites-Video resources as well as high interest multi-genre authentic literature, big books, trade books, manipulatives, visuals such as picture cards, audio CD’s and cassettes, smart board interactive activities, as well as interactive CD Rom’s for computer use. This year we will continue to reinforce our Words Their Way Program ( word study) by adding a Words Their Way Resource Component to the ENL Program. Our goal is not just to develop vocabulary in isolation, but to develop the skills necessary, such as Latin stems, vowel alternation patterns in related words and pairs, derivational relations, Greek roots, etc. so that they become life long deciphers of words. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The following methods and approaches are a school wide practice and are immersed: Our science program is FOSS, it is a hands on program that allows children to explore materials and develop hypotheses as they investigate. Teachers use videos, pictures cards, create table tents to introduces concepts and vocabulary that needs to be understood in order to conduct any experiment or exploration. Children work in cooperative learning groups, have their own science notebooks and vocabulary lists with pictures. For the most part, our ELL's have met proficiency on the grade 4 Science Exam. We also incorporate STEM into our Science Curriculum to provide students with as many opportunities to inquire and become project based learners. The Next Generation Science Standards drive intruction. ELA- ELL's are grouped according to the NYSESLAT Data and TCRWP Data, 2018-19 CEP 144  and formal and informal observations. They are in small guided reading groups. Again all reading materials are of high interest and they are unpacked for language so that their understanding is fostered. Writing about reading is part and parcel of our reading program, those we look for reciprocity. Besides writing for reading, our children (all children, including ELL's) are immersed in the Writing Workshop-this workshop not only teaches students to write in a variety of genres, (memoir writing, narrative writing, lifting quality of their writing by learning a variety of revision strategies, personal essays, literary essays, non fiction writing, realistic fiction, historical fiction and persuasive writing), it also teaches children to collect ideas, develop ideas, revise, edit, draft, publish and celebrate their writing.• Hands on, exploratory and investigative learning• Use of visuals, music, theatre art and dance• Use of computers, software, smart boards, educational games• Homework help• Small group / one on one intervention Computer Software programs: Reading Eggs, Math Seeds, Help Math, travelling laptops for inquiry and research, as well as the Computer lab for Class instruction.In addition to receiving the mandated minutes and serviced in a stand-alone and integrated ENL, students receive flexibility of core subject instruction with ENL by certified, highly trained pedagogues, using best strategies and best practices for ELL's and SWD's accompanied by carefully planned tools, resources and differentiated lessons. The classroom teachers and subject teachers work collaboratively with the ENL Teacher and co-teach. The teachers will be planning and teaching together, fostering more one-on-one and small group interaction and to ensure that all activities are scaffolded and differentiated to meet the needs of our ELL subgroup.As mentioned previously, a variety of instructional materials will be employed in order to teach the English language in context and to support the English language acquisition, including: 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students with Learning Disabilities are included in every thing we do as a school community. Flexible scheduling is used to support students who have SETSS, ICT and are Self Contained. We have a part time ICT Setting and our SETSS Teacher provides Part Time ICT Services to ELL students with IEP's. Moreover, our SWD also receive AIS Services in addition to all other services they are entitled to. They are invited to attend Saturday Academy, our IReady Math and our Early Morning Tutorial Program, as well as participate in our Title III Program. Students in Self Contained settings also participate in as many less restrictive environments as possible. Instruction during ENL is all inclusive as they engage with children from other GE classes. Moreover, there are children who are mainstreamed into GE classes for reading, writing and math. Please note that every child has a personal goal, these goals are fluid, thus as they attain the goal, they continue to grow.Native language support is offered to all children within the context of the classroom to make content comprehensible and to enrich language development through multi-lingual and multi-cultural libraries. Within the school community we utilize all resources available to lift comprehension, for example children serve as language brokers, staff serve as language brokers and translators, and we work closely with the community and parents to lift understanding and clarify content that needs to be unpacked. Science and Social Studies are not only integrated within the literacy curriculum, but also taught as a content area. Science is hands on and inquiry based, and all children receive 2 or more periods of science a week. All vocabulary and concepts are unpacked, for example juicy words, and concepts are introduced within the context to lift understanding, the interactive and hands on experience allows them to explore and question what they are doing in small groups, this allows the teacher the ability to circulate and provide small group intervention that ensures that ELL students and all students understand what they are doing with an emphasis on developing hypotheses that they can talk and write about. In Social Studies, visuals, primary sources and artifacts are used in addition to using the smart board media to access parts of historical data to further lift the comprehension of not just our ELL students, but all students. The small group work is rigorously differentiated and teachers ensure that ELL students are focused an on task by providing them with table tents, graphic organizers, and rubrics that guide their learning. Title III Monies are also used to purchase materials for classroom use and to enhance and continue to rigorously develop the language skills of all ELL’s through theatre, dance, art and music. This year we are once again planning tutorial sessions-these sessions are designed for our grade 3-5 students, the NYSESLAT data has demonstrated that writing is an area that needs to improve, thus we have early morning tutorial sessions that provide our students with coaching in writing, they are taught one or two writing structures that are used to write about reading, and they are taught the literary essay structure. The grade K-2 students engage in hands-on scientific explorations and research with emphasis on informational literature and supported by a variety of video and audio components, games, educational activities and observations. As a school wide project school, ELL’s are included in everything we do that enriches the student’s scholarly lives. Students with disabilities and Long term ELL’s are carefully monitored by the Inquiry Team. Formal and informal observations by classroom teacher and other staff, intensive intervention, and out reach to families are a few of the methods we use to assess and address the needs of long term ELL’s. When as a school we have 2018-19 CEP 145  exhausted all means of addressing their academic needs, students are referred to the School Assessment Team for an Educational Evaluation. Experience has taught us that many of these students come from homes where the parents lack formal education in their own native language, are functionally literate and parental involvement in school is very limited not because of their limits academically, but because their work schedules consume their lives. Our goal is to find a way to address their needs and the needs of their families. All ELL students are invited to attend the Summer Success Regional Programs. Parents are invited to attend all instructional, curricular workshops provided by the school, local community based organizations and ENL Classes that might be offered locally free of charge. Parents who attend school workshops are given materials to use at home with their children, and translated materials and information are consistently sent home and provided at parent workshops. In addition, our Kindergarten and 1st grade ELL's are invited to attend the Early Morning Academy which is offered 3 times a week for an hour and provides children with the opportunity to develop their early reading/writing/thinking/conversational skills. They are also invited to participate in the Saturday Test Prep Academy. This program is offered to all students inclusive of ELL's every Saturday for 3 hours and focuses on the reading, writing and math skills they will need to develop to successfully broach the ELA and Math exams. Moreover, children in upper grades are offered a new enrichment, computer-based, interactive program I-Ready which allows them to practice their math skills, monitor their progress and make improvements each time they complete an assignment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All the children who are identified as students at risk and in need of interventions in ELA, math and other content areas are carefully grouped according to their needs and are offered additional small group support before, during, after school. They are invited to attend Saturday Academy to learn to unpack test questions and complex text. We have an AIS Teacher who pushes into classrooms to work with small groups. For grade K-1 students we have an Early Morning Academy, a tutorial program. Grades 2-5 participate in I-Ready Math After-school program and Math Reflex targeted remedial program that utilizes technology. The following Assessment tools are used school wide:NYSITELL NYSESLAT Spanish LAB-TCRWP - Spelling Assessments / Running Records TCRWP Genre Based Assessments Grades 2-5Reading Progressions Informational Writing Continuum Formative assessments and Success Criteria Beginning, Middle and End of the Chapter/Unit Assessments in Go Math Based on the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and ELA Data, it is noted that our grade K-2 children, students new to the system and students with disabilities show needs in development of the oral language and early literacy skills. With this said, we are setting a standard of expectations in regard to language acquisition and development. Specifically, we want our children to be able to speak in complete thoughts and use a rich, more complex vocabulary, inclusive of the content academic vocabulary, to express their thinking, ideas and points of view not only orally but also in writing and across content areas. Therefore, this year, we are setting goals for the children that are inclusive of these needs. NYSESLAT and ELA Data shows that ELL's in grades 3-5 need additional support in writing. For example, they need additional skills and strategies to be able to respond to literature, answer open ended questions, use specific writing structures and strategies (Boxes and Bullets, note-taking, paragraphs with several examples and supporting evidence), essay writing format and distinguishing the difference between various essays (literary, persuasive, argumentative). All English Language Learners will be immersed in deep and rigorous academic instruction with a strong emphasis in higher order thinking skills. They will also be immersed in writing across content areas, and in addition to the ENL services, they will receive small group instruction within the context of their classrooms. They participate in our rich Title III program. It will run once a week for 2 hours. Specifically, ELL's in Kindergarten through 2nd grade will be learning scientific concepts through reading and writing that will be integrated in informational texts. They will be engaged in high interest, inquiry-based learning activities and hands-on lessons. The emphasis will be on helping children develop oral English language, build higher level of academic content specific vocabulary, learn how to unpack complex text, lift student understanding and engage in critical analysis and evaluation. Students will culminate the program by having a multicultural celebration together with their families where they will share and celebrate their projects, presentations and writing. Students in grades 3-5 will engage in reading and writing activities that will help them learn how to accumulate text, respond to text in critical analysis of the story plot. In writing, they will be engaged in learning the 3 essay writing structures, specifically, literary essay, persuasive essay and argumentative essay. Students will be able to raise level of essay 2018-19 CEP 146  writing by working on structure, development and language conventions. The informational TCRWP Continuum will be used to assess student writing and lift quality of writing. The culmination of the program will consist of a celebration of student work. In addition, our ELL's are invited to attend a wide array of instructional support groups which focus on reading, writing, math, and the arts. While some programs serve as remediation and offer extra practice, other programs enrich students' lives and broaden their horizons, offering all children opportunities to learn how to express themselves through dance, percussion, song writing and theater, Documentary Photography and Film-Making. The AIS support service is available for our ELL's to receive assistance in small reading and math groups. Also, targeted children, inclusive of the Commanding ELL's who attained proficiency are grouped according to their needs and serviced during the Integrated ENL instruction in order to build English language skills through content area instruction in ELA, math, science and social studies in a co-teaching model. All children inclusive of current and Commanding ELL's are invited to participate in the following programs throughout the day, after school and on Saturdays: 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Under the new CR Part 154 mandates, our ENL program will be scheduled in such a way that we service all our ELL's and provide a mandated 90 minute a week support to our Commanding students who are former ELL's for up to 2 years. We will continue offering our students the high quality, high interest and high need before, during and after school programs that will positively benefit our students and provide an array of enrichment opportunities to all of them. We look carefully at the effectiveness of the current programs we offer and would like to sustain those that prove to be the most effective and desirable as noted by staff, students and parents. We will seek new programs in technology, the arts and music that will enrich our children's lives. We plan to continue offering our families remedial programs in ELA and Math, and consider bringing in Reader's Theater, Math and Science to our ELL's after school. We will continue building high self-esteem, citizenship, leadership and empowering school-wide decision making among our upper grade students. They are engaged in our Senior Service Committee and are accountable for various responsibilities in the school. Our teachers will be pursuing bilingual and TESOL certifications to better serve our ELL's. We will continue involving our parent constituencies, inclusive of families of ELL's in various teams and shared decision making. Our teachers are offered a variety of high quality Professional Development opportunities throughout the school year. We will continue looking for ways to acquire grants and fundraisers for educational and fun programs and activities for our students and parents. Our parents will continue receiving high quality, highly informational workshops, trainings and presentations to build outreach, improve school-home connections and to involve our parents in everything their children do. This year, we made connections with several community organization and we plan to further our relationship to better serve the community and the children. We also understand and value the power of communication with our parents and always look for new ways to improve it. We plan to research alternative ways to use technology and the Internet for these purposes. We will continue preparing our students for Middle school and will plan inter-visitations with the middle school teachers and administrators our students will move up to. In addition, we are always researching new ways to prepare our students for college careers opportunities. We plan to offer our students multiple opportunities to meet inspirational individuals from many areas of business, arts, music, sports, politics and community services. In addition, we will continue improving and enriching our instruction delivery to meet the diverse needs of our students. With this said, we plan to involve curriculum, instructional specialists and technology experts to share best and current research-based practices and ideas with our staff and parents. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently, we are not planning to discontinue any programs//services as all of them proved to be highly beneficial to our school community. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. As mentioned previously, all students, inclusive of ELL's and Commanding students are invited to every and all before and after-school programs and are offered at no cost to the families. ALL students are provided with multiple choices of programs that best suit their interests, needs and benefit the children. No child is denied a program of their choice. In fact, families are encouraged to sign their children up in a program or few, and are explained how it will benefit the child. Our ELL's are always included in everything we do. Parents/guardians receive applications and information in their home language and we meet them in person to explain about the programs offered so they can make a more informed choice for their child. Our ENL teachers and our Parent Coordinator, as well as our administration and staff always provide families with time and effort to answer their questions and place a child in a program of their choice. 2018-19 CEP 147  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ELL's participate in a rigorous ENL Program which is aligned with CCLS's. A variety of materials are employed in order to teach the English language in context. The NYSESLAT, LAB R, TCRWP, ON DEMAND WRITING, BASELINE ASSESSMENTS, UNIT ASSESSMENTS and Teacher Created Assessments are used to guide instruction in ALL content areas and in English as well as in languages spoken in our school The following materials are used: Leveled books Non fiction libraries Charts Picture Dictionaries Bilingual Dictionaries Multi Cultural booksBooks in many languages Big Books Mentor Text Graphic Organizers Sentence Strips Rubrics Pocket Charts Words on rings Audio Visuals Realia and manipulatives Artifacts for content learning Personal word banks Thematic word walls Interactive games and videos Books on tape CD Players Promethean Boards Computer Stations (in library, and all classrooms) Cameras Internet Reading Eggs (interactive literacy) Math Seeds (interactive math)Digital resources in GO MATHMondo Reading Program/ResourcesMentoring Minds (Reading and Math Supplemental program). 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL Program we use bilingual books, songs, poetry, assemblies for Hispanic Heritage, and story telling from around the world, our Dance Program is multi-cultural and taps into stories, songs, dances from around the world. Our genre studies tap into literature, poetry, and cultural traditions from around the world.Students are allowed to use bilingual dictionaries and glossaries at all times and during testing they are allowed to use the test in their native language if provided by the STATE. Many of our students also serve as language brokers, they interpret for parents and for students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ENL / Instructional programs are aligned to a specific age group, as we service students in grades K-5. Students are grouped according State regulations in age appropriate grades/ENL groups for services. The new entrants are administered the NYSITELL according to their grade level and time of arrival. The NYSESLAT is administered to grade bands in accordance with the State regulations. We strictly adhere to the test administration dates. All children are placed in age and grade appropriate settings and are provided reading, writing, math, and all other materials and resources on their grade level. We use data to plan instruction and instructional materials and resources, including leveled books, supplemental texts, vocabulary words, etc. All required services and resources we offer support and correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 148  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL's are welcomed to our school community with sympathy and loving care. The families immediately go through an Interview process in English and their home language. The children are assessed as needed and placed into a program of the parents' choice once the parent orientation is conducted. All children are placed into an age and grade appropriate setting. The newcomers are introduced to the teachers and class and buddied up with other students who help them acclimate to the school environment and instructional expectations. The ENL Teacher, classroom teacher, parent coordinator and school administrators ensure that the students are welcomed. They are escorted to the classroom with parents and introduced to the classroom community. Parents are invited to attend the parent orientation and it is ensured that someone is there to translate for them. This same process is applied to the students. As long as the language is one spoken in school, we communicate with that child in their dominant language. If we do not speak the language and we have no one to translate, we reach out to our parent constituency in hopes that they know someone who can assist us. For extended day we provide our new arrivals with one on one ENL support. The goal is to create a very comfortable transition for them, we want new arrivals to take language risks and we want to engage them with as much hands on support as possible. We use lots of photos with them, artifacts, manipulative, realia and materials in their native language. Our school is very warm and welcoming, new arrivals usually acclimate quickly.In our school, the guidance counselor plays an important role in supporting the Ells and the parents of ELLs, with their academic path, and their transitioning process to middle school. Our team, inclusive of Administrators, the School Guidance counselor, Parent coordinator, ENL teachers, and other staff members in collaboration with the middle school team, organize many opportunities for ELLs to become familiar with and understand the choices offered to them and their children, in the Middle School. Specifically, ELL students and parents attend information sessions, and open houses, meet with middle school representatives to learn about the many opportunities available to them to further their education. They also receive assistance with the filling out of important documents and forms required in Middle School. The school Guidance counselor attends professional development workshops within the District and out, and turn-keys the information to team, to better assist our students and their families to Middle School. There is open and clear communication staff and families. Parents and students are always encouraged to ask questions and explore choices that are available to them. All the communication is made in the parents preferred language with wither translation services or bilingual staff on hand. In our school, the guidance counselor plays an important role in supporting the Ells and the parents of ELLs, with their academic path, and their transitioning process to middle school. Our team, inclusive of Administrators, the School Guidance counselor, Parent coordinator, ENL teachers, and other staff members in collaboration with the middle school team, organize many opportunities for ELLs to become familiar with and understand the choices offered to them and their children, in the Middle School. Specifically, ELL students and parents attend information sessions, and open houses, meet with middle school representatives to learn about the many opportunities available to them to further their education. They also receive assistance with the filling out of important documents and forms required in Middle School. The school Guidance counselor attends professional development workshops within the District and out, and turn-keys the information to team, to better assist our students and their families to Middle School. There is open and clear communication staff and families. Parents and students are always encouraged to ask questions and explore choices that are available to them. All the communication is made in the parents preferred language with wither translation services or bilingual staff on hand. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time we do not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 2018-19 CEP 149  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? At this time we do not offer dual language programs. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At P.S. 38, Professional development is an ongoing journey. As planned, administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals and parents will participate in staff development sessions addressing such areas as the Core Curriculum and how ELL students gain access to it. Regional ELL Instructional Support Specialists and our ENL Teacher conduct interactive professional development sessions. All teachers will be provided an opportunity to receive a minimum of 15% of the requirement professional development hours for all teachers as prescribed by CR Part 80 and is going to be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. The ENL teacher a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL's. In our school, all teachers are considered teachers of ELL's. We pride ourselves with providing a high quality, rigorous professional growth opportunities to all our teachers. All teachers are kept informed of professional development opportunities focusing on language development. Our teachers employ a series of methods and approaches that support our ELL's in the classroom. For example, vocabulary is carefully introduced and associated with what they know; when themes are developed a great deal of time is taken to build background knowledge and use their schema to scaffold their learning. Teachers are provided with glossaries and dictionaries that our ELL's have access to, and the use of cooperative learning techniques, small group, one on one, use of visuals, audio/video, artifacts, smart board and hands on materials and partnerships for oral language development for accountable talk are a common practice in the school. We plan to share the New Directions for ELL's, new Blueprint for English Language Learners (ELLS) Success, the New Language Arts Progressions and the new data collection tool, the EDAT Tool Estimator With Early Warning Indicators in a series of Professional Development sessions. Our teachers will become familiar with the assessments for ELL's such as the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT in order to better understand the demands of these tests and which skills and strategies our students need to be taught in order to meet these demands. In addition, all teachers will participate in the ENL training on best practices that emphasize differentiated instruction and careful planning to meet the needs of all our ELL's and to build the capacity of all our teachers so that they can deliver high quality instruction. These workshops are available through a variety of forums, such as Teacher's College, District based and Schools Based PD. Our ENL teachers, Mrs. Dukhovny and Mrs. Gjoni who attends District wide PD sessions and seminars turn key the information with administrations and staff. Our Network ELL Support Specialist visits our school and also provides PD workshops for our staff. Our Teachers attend ELL workshops and also share the information with their colleagues. This year, Professional Development workshops will be offered on Monday PD days 2:45-4:00p.m.They will be conducted by our ENL teacher/Program coordinator, Mrs. Dukhovny, Mrs. Gjoni and the Network ELL Support Specialist, teachers who will be attending and turn keying ENL PD information and the administration. The PD's will be offered to all our staff, inclusive of classroom and support personnel, paraprofessionals and service providers. Tentative topics are as follows: The New CR Part 154, English Language Learner Policy and Reference Guide 2016-2017 Assessments: New Running Records and Reading Progress continuum Behavior Management / RTI / Creating a Sensory Smart Classroom Environment / Vertical Conversations driven by data K-2 Guided Reading /Transference / Word Study Introducing the new Blueprint for ELL's Success and the New Language Progressions Planning Writing Tasks for ELL's with Data in Mind Writing and STARS Planning 2018-19 CEP 150  Small Group Work in Writing Planning Looking at Data: The EDAT Tool Estimator with Early Warning Indicators ELL Assessments: NYSITELL and NYSESLAT Instructional Strategies for ELL's with Special Needs Preparing for the NYSESLAT, Test in Review-All Grade Band / Testing Strategies for the ELA exam Testing Strategies for the Math exam Overview NYSESLAT Rubrics for Scoring A Year in Review and Implications for next year Our ESL teachers, Mrs. Dukhovny and Mrs. Gjoni attend District wide PD sessions and seminars and turn key the information with administration and staff. Our District ELL Deputy Director and our ELL Support Specialist, Millie Cordova visits our school and also provides PD workshops for our staff. Our Teachers attend ELL workshops and also share the information with their colleagues. This year, Professional Development workshops will be offered on Monday PD days 2:45-4:00p.m.They will be conducted by our ENL teacher/Program coordinator, Mrs. Dukhovny and Mrs Gjoni, teachers who will be attending and turn keying ENL PD information and the administration. The PD's will be offered to all our staff, inclusive of classroom and support personnel, paraprofessionals and service providers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We have established a collaborative partnership with staff of the middle school who are invited to have shared sessions with our teachers and parents. Our 5 th grade teachers and students are invited to visit the middle school for a transition day experience. All information disseminated to students and parents to assist them in the transition process is in their home language or orally translated with the use of the Interpretation and Translation Unit when necessary. ENL teacher provides staff with PD sessions based on adolescent needs, the middle grades concept, diversity (cultural, academic, gender) and differentiated instruction. The conversations are on-going and the topics are derived from the needs and patterns gathered by the middle school staff as well as from the observations and inquiries of our teachers. Support is provided to all staff to assist ELL's as they move on to the middle school. Teachers and parents are offered translation services. We assist students in filing applications, writing entrance essays and helping them choose the best programs of their choice and interest. Students are getting equipped with the content and domain specific vocabulary they need to continue growing academically across content areas. As mentioned previously, at P.S. 38, Professional development is an ongoing journey. As planned, administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals and parents will participate in staff development sessions addressing such areas as the Core Curriculum and how ELL students gain access to it. Regional ELL Instructional Support Specialists and our ENL Teacher conduct interactive professional development sessions. All teachers will be provided an opportunity to receive a minimum of 15% of the requirement professional development hours for all teachers as prescribed by CR Part 80 and is going to be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. The ENL teacher a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL's. All records for professional development activities, e.g., agendas and sign in sheets are made copies of and placed in ENL Compliance binder, one is kept in the ENL binder in the main office. Records of teachers attending the PD sessions are carefully monitored throughout the year and those teachers who need to complete the mandated PD hours are offered multiple opportunities in addition to the PD trainings and workshops available in school. 2018-19 CEP 151  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We are proud to say that at P.S. 38, we pay particular attention to all of our parents, and especially the parents of our growing ELL population, as we believe, "it takes a village to raise a child". Our parents know that in our school we promote and practice mutual support, cooperation and collaboration between administration, teachers and parents. All staff members make it a priority to create a safe, welcoming environment and address all the questions and concerns that might arise during the school year. In collaboration with our ENL teacher, meetings and workshops are being held throughout the school year. We utilize the Parent Tuesdays to meet with parents individually, to inform them about their child's progress, share information and data from assessments and tests, writing samples, math and other content area work samples. Parents are welcomed to our school any time that is convenient for them. We understand that our parents are working parents and make every effort to accommodate their busy lifestyles, offering them to come before, during and after school as well as on Tuesdays, our Parent Engagement days. Parents and families are encouraged to participate in the Parent Orientation for new arrivals at the beginning of the school year upon their registration. Also, a series of workshops are offered to the parents so that they can learn more about the ENL program, Title III and other programs offered in our school for ELL students , as well as State standards, assessments and expectations. Parents are invited to attend an Annual Parent Symposium for parents of ELL's, where they have an opportunity to learn more about programs, methodologies, strategies and skills they can practice at home with their children in their native language and in English. Parents participate in all parent workshops offered at our school. They are invited to our monthly Parent As Learning Partner Days to observe and engage in a learning experience with their child. These monthly sessions are focused and give our Parents an opportunity to better understand our curriculum, our practices and how standards are integrated in everything we do. Our ENL Teachers, our Parent Coordinator, as well as administration and staff are always available to discuss the activities that are specifically targeted to our ELL Constituency. Prior to the commencement of the program parents are invited to a TITLE III orientation. At the orientation, they are introduced to the staff that provides services, overview program goals, specific areas to be targeted, why specific areas are targeted, how they will be addressed and how they enhance student learning and achievement. The parents will receive a schedule of when the program begins and ends, and they will also get an overview of materials that will be used. In addition, it must be noted that all our parents are invited to participate in collaborative parent-child activities, including a final assembly and student work celebration that culminates the program. This year, we will conduct high interest/hands-on interactive Parent-Child workshops designed specifically for the parents and their children to learn and work together with guidance of the Marquis Studios resident and our ENL Teacher. These workshops will enhance our parental outreach and give parents opportunities to learn of more ways they can support their children's English language development. In particular, one of the workshops will be devoted to Book Making. All Parent engagement activities we plan are highly meaningful, comprehensive and aimed to address the needs of all of our parents and especially the parents of ELL's. We make sure to offer our parents all the materials, resources and tools they need to help their children at home. We also provide interpretation services and provide written materials in parents' home language using the Interpretation and Translation services, the automated calling system and the teachers who speak the languages. In addition, parents are encouraged to become members of the PTA, School Leadership Team, and are invited to participate in Family Nights, Parent as Learning Partner days, assemblies, and all other activities and events throughout the course of the school year. Parents are notified at our PTA Meetings, SLT team meetings and via flyers, letters, instant messenger and our school website.Our parents will participate in staff development sessions addressing such areas as the Core Curriculum and how ELL students gain access to it. Regional ELL Instructional Support Specialists, teachers and our ENL Teacher conduct interactive professional development sessions on every grade level and in all content areas. All communication is done in parents' preferred language. We reach out to the Translation and Interpretation Unit in case no one in school speaks the language. Regardless, we establish a productive communication with our parents in respectful, caring and culturally-sensitive manner. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. As mentioned above, the Parent Engagement activities and Professional Development workshops will be offered on Tuesdays, 2:45pm-4:00pm, our Parent days and other days throughout the school year. Some of the Parent engagement activities will be offered after school and on weekends by the District level and local professionals and parent outreach organizations affiliated with the DOE. They will be conducted by our ENL teachers and the District ELL Support Specialist will be attending and turn keying ENL PD information and the administration as well as our Parent Coordinator, and her colleagues from central. In addition, we are planning Parents as Teachers and Parents as College and Career Role Models - collaborative interactive parent-child activities . All parents of ELL's will be invited to participate. Some topics are as follows: 2018-19 CEP 152  Parent Orientation for New Admits Early Reading Strategies Workshop for parents of children in Grades K and 1 Parents as Learning Partners. Focus - Reading Workshop Parent workshop: ELA and Math State Tests Review in the Light of CCLS's Parents as Learning Partners. Focus - Math Title III Parent Meeting Parent-Child workshop "Book Making" Parents as Learning Partners. Focus - Use of Technology in the Classroom Parents as Learning Partners. Focus - Writing Parents as Learning Partners. Focus - Science Parents as Learning Partners. Focus - Social Studies NYSESLAT Parent Workshop Parents as Learning Partners. Focus - OPEN We are proud to say that at P.S. 38, we pay particular attention to all of our parents, and especially the parents of our growing ELL population, as we believe, "it takes a village to raise a child". Our parents know that in our school we promote and practice mutual support, cooperation and collaboration between administration, teachers and parents. All staff members make it a priority to create a safe, welcoming environment and address all the questions and concerns that might arise during the school year. In collaboration with our ENL teachers, meetings and workshops are being held throughout the school year. Parents and families are encouraged to participate in the Parent Orientation for new arrivals at the beginning of the school year upon their registration. Also, a series of workshops are offered to the parents so that they can learn more about the ENL program, Title III and other programs offered in our school for ELL students , as well as State standards, assessments and expectations.Additionally, Parents are invited to attend an Annual Parent Symposium for parents of ELL's, where they have an opportunity to learn more about programs, methodologies, strategies and skills they can practice at home with their children in their native language and in English. Parents participate in all parent workshops offered at our school. They are invited to our monthly Parent As Learning Partner Days to observe and engage in a learning experience with their child. These monthly sessions are focused and give our Parents an opportunity to better understand our curriculum, our practices and how standards are integrated in everything we do. Our ENL Teachers, our Parent Coordinator, as well as administration are always available to discuss the activities that are specifically targeted to our ENL Constituency. Prior to the commencement of the program parents are invited to a TITLE III orientation. At the orientation, they are introduced to the staff that provides services, overview program goals, specific areas to be targeted, why specific areas are targeted, how they will be addressed and how they enhance student learning and achievement. The parents will receive a schedule of when the program begins and ends, and they will also get an overview of materials that will be used. In addition, it must be noted that all our parents are invited to participate in collaborative parent-child activities, including a final assembly and student work celebration that culminates the program. All Parent engagement activities we plan are highly meaningful, comprehensive and aimed to address the needs of all of our parents and especially the parents of ELL's. We make sure to offer our parents all the materials, resources and tools they need to help their children at home. We also provide interpretation services and provide written materials in parents' home language using the Interpretation and Translation services, the automated calling system and the teachers who speak the languages. In addition, parents are encouraged to become members of the PTA, School Leadership Team, and are invited to participate in Family Nights, Parent as Learning Partner days, assemblies, and all other activities and events throughout the course of the school year. Parents are notified at our PTA Meetings, SLT team meetings and via flyers, letters, instant messenger and our school website. At P.S. 38, Professional development is an ongoing journey. As planned, administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals and parents will participate in staff development sessions addressing such areas as the Core Curriculum and how ELL students gain access to it. Regional ELL Instructional Support Specialists and our ENL Teacher conduct interactive professional development sessions inclusive of all teachers and staff.In our school, all teachers are considered teachers of ELL's. We pride ourselves with providing a high quality, rigorous professional growth opportunities to all our teachers. All teachers are kept informed of professional development opportunities focusing on language development. Our teachers employ a series of methods and approaches that support our ELL's in the classroom. For example, vocabulary is carefully introduced and associated with what they know; when themes are developed a great deal of time is taken to build background knowledge and use their schema to scaffold their learning. Teachers are provided with glossaries and dictionaries that our ELL's have access to, and the use of cooperative learning techniques, small group, one on one, use of visuals, 2018-19 CEP 153  audio/video, artifacts, smart board and hands on materials and partnerships for oral language development for accountable talk are a common practice in the school. We plan to share the New Directions for ELL's, new Blueprint for English Language Learners (ELLS) Success, the New Language Arts Progressions and the new data collection tool, the EDAT Tool Estimator With Early Warning Indicators in a series of Professional Development sessions. Our teachers will become familiar with the assessments for ELL's such as the NYSITELL snd the NYSESLAT in order to better understand the demands of these tests and which skills and strategies our students need to be taught in order to meet these demands. In addition, all teachers will participate in the ESL training on best practices that emphasize differentiated instruction and careful planning to meet the needs of all our ELL's and to build the capacity of all our teachers so that they can deliver high quality instruction. These workshops are available through a variety of forums, such as Teacher's College, District based and Schools Based PD. Our ENL teachers, attend District wide PD sessions and seminars and turn key the information with administrations and staff. Our Network ELL Support Specialist, visits our school and also provides PD workshops for our staff. Our Teachers attend ELL workshops and also share the information with their colleagues. This year, Parent Engagement activities and Professional Development workshops will be offered on Tuesdays, 2:45pm-4:00pm, our Parent Engagement days, as well as on Thursdays and other days throughout the school year. Some of the Parent engagement activities will be offered after school and on weekends by the District professionals and parent outreach organizations affiliated with the DOE. They will be conducted by our ENL teacher/Program coordinator, the District ELL Specialists, teachers who will be attending and turn keying ENL PD information and the administration as well as our Parent Coordinator, and her colleagues from central. All parents of ELL's will be invited to participate.The tentative dates and topics are as follows: *September 18, 2018 - Assessments: New Running Records and Reading Progress continuum *September 25, 2018 - Behavior Management / RTI *October 9, 2018 - Creating a Sensory Smart Classroom Environment / Vertical Conversations driven by data *October 23, 2018 - K-2 Guided Reading /Transference / Word Study *November 13, 2018 - Title III Staff Preliminary Meeting Planning, Goals, Expectations, Materials *November 27, 2018 - Introducing the new Blueprint for ELL's Success and the New Language Progressions *December 4, 2018- Planning Writing Tasks for ELL's with Data in Mind *December 11, 2018 -Oral Language Objectives and Development within integrated content areas *December 18, 2018 -Small Group Work in Writing *January 8, 2019 - Title III Staff Data Inquiry Session *January 15, 2019 - ELL and Non-ELL language and content objectives *Febryary 12, 2018 - Looking at Data: The EDAT Tool Estimator with Early Warning Indicators *February 26, 2019 - Formative Assessments, review and common threads *March 5, 2019 - ELL Assessments: NYSITELL and NYSESLAT *March 12, 2019 - Title III Staff Addressing Teacher's Needs: Best Practices to improve ELL Performance *April 2, 2019- Instructional Strategies for ELL's with Special Needs *April 16, 2019- Preparing for the NYSESLAT, Test in Review-All Grade Band / Testing Strategies for the ELA exam *May 7, 2019 - Testing Strategies for the Math exam *May 21, 2019 -Overview NYSESLAT Rubrics for Scoring Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 154  2018-19 CEP 155 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Nancy Murillo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 156  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The George Cromwell School School DBN: 31R038 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Nancy Murillo Title Principal Teuta Ulaj Assistant Principal Mercedes Chow Parent Coordinator Emma Dukhovny and Leidona Gjon ENL/Bilingual Teacher Nicole Ryan Parent Judith Anastasio Teacher/Subject Area Mary Frisz Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Stacy Madaio School Counselor Anthony Lodico Enrico Domingo N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 N/A N/A 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 157  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R038 School Name: The George Cromwell School Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*PrimaryMercedes Chow Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home Language Identification Survey forms and the Initial Oral Interview are used to determine language dominance of both students and parents. During the Initial Enrollment, our parents fill out a number of forms where they indicate the languages spoken at home and their language preferences for oral and written communication. Such forms include the Student Emergency Contact Blue card, Moreover, when parents come in for formal or informal conferences language dominance is also determined. Every attempt is made to communicate with parents via translations and interpretation of information, letters and flyers. Spanish, Russian, Polish, Slovak, Ukranian, Arabic, Albanian, Chinese and Turkish are spoken by the teaching staff and is available for interpretation at the school level. Forms, letters, DOE applications and forms are available in many languages and translated at the school level. Central Translation services have been used to translate forms and letters in languages other than the languages spoken and available at the school level. However, it is important to note that the staff at PS 38 is multilingual, and many of our parents, who speak a language other than my staff, are always available to assist parents. In all other cases we make every effort and take all the steps to provide our parents with a certified translator/interpreter. We call the Translation and Interpretation Services Unit for assistance 2018-19 CEP 158  when meeting with parents face to face, or have an over the phone 3-way call conference/meeting. Many of our parents indicate to us that even though, they might speak a language other than English at home, they do not read or write in that language and prefer receiving all written communication in English. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The major findings are that parents who speak a language other than English do need translation and interpretation services. The two languages that are of dominance within our ELL population are Spanish and Russian, however Chinese, Arabic and Ukrainian are a growing population within the school. The following are the languages spoken: Albanian, Arabic, Cantonese, Chinese, English, Hindi, Lithuanian, Mandarin, Tagalog, Polish, Punjabi, Russian, Slovak, Spanish, Ukrainian, Uzbek, Georgian, Italian and Urdu. N/A N/A N/A English, Spanish, Chinese 50 English, Spanish, Rissian, Chinese 50 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2018-19 CEP 159  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The following are letters that require translations and that are sent out either monthly or as needed: Handbook is posted on website (EChalk) and that is translated in many languages. Beginning of the year letter to Parents from the school and any from Central September 17 All letters from administration Monthly curricular letters to parents from staff Monthly Calendars Parent Teacher Conferences AfterSchool Information and Applications Health forms Lunch forms All forms related to new admits ENL Information and Parent Letters Reminder flyers Trip information September 17 Sept 17-June 19 Letters about special programs ( Title III, Saturday Academy, etc) We use school messenger to send phone message and important information to families. This is translated as well. We use our e-chalk website to post all school related information, letters, calendars, events, etc. This website has a translation feature a parent can click which will translate the whole website to their language. We have a number of staff who speak Russian, Polish, Ukrainian, Slovak, Spanish, Albanian, Arabic, Turkish and Chinese and translate for families. We also use translation and interpretation services. 2018-19 CEP 160  Testing Calendars / Testing translations in low inference languages Phone Blasts in English and Spanish All ELL parent letters NYSESLAT parent letters Information about programs offered before, after school and on Saturdays Letters from the School Leadership Special Education letters N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Face to face meetings: On Going Sept 17-June 19 Registration across all grade levels ELL Parent Oral Interviews NYC School Account Surveys Teacher Orientations / Curriculum Days Parent Teacher Conferences Tuesday Parent Engagement Days Sept 17 provide interpretation service(s)? We use school messenger to send phone message and important information to families. This is translated as well. We use our e-chalk website to post all school related information, letters, calendars, events, etc. This website has a translation feature a parent can click which will translate the whole website to their language. We have a number of staff who speak Russian, Polish, Ukrainian, Slovak, Spanish, Albanian, Arabic, Turkish and Chinese and translate for families. 2018-19 CEP 161  Parent As Learning Partner Days We also use translation and interpretation services. Attendance Monitor and guidance counselors contacts parents as needed RTI / SAT / IEP Teacher round tables for RTI / SETSS / IEP Conferences / Promotional Decisions,etc. Parent Complaints / Concerns Parent Workshops such as; ELA / Math / Early Reading Strategies / Word Study / Science, Special Ed., Kindergarten Orientation, Staggered days for PRE K, PRE K Child / Parent engagement days SIFE meeting with parents LPT team meeting with parents of ELL's Title III Academy parent workshop Child/Parent workshops and trainings ELL parent meetings and workshops Any and all informal interactions that need to take place on the run N/A N/A N/A Sept 17, Nov 14, March 13, May 15 Sept 17- June 19 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have a number of staff members who speak Spanish, Russian, Ukraininan, Polish, Slovak, Albanian, Arabic, Chinese and Turkish. They translate and communicate with families. 2018-19 CEP 162  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Through professional development in house and off site training staff will be aware of the Chancellor's Regulations regarding Language translation services and programs to meet the needs of language learners. Language Access Coordinator attends district professional development trainings and turn-keys information. All staff is trained how to access Translation and Interpretation services and use them successfully. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Welcome Poster is posted at the entrance of the school, and in the main office we keep the "Parents' Bill of Rights" binder and parents have access to it. We ensure that all information in regard to translations and interpretation services are shared with parents, via posters, letters, at PTA Meetings, SLT meetings, etc. Our families know that we find ways to communicate with them and that there are services available to them to assist as needed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will develop a survey to gather feedback on the quality of translation and interpretation services. Parents are always asked for their feedback on the quality and availability of the information they receive in their language at meetings, conferences, workshops and trainings and how can we improve them. All the parental feedback is communicated to the administration and staff/teams so that everyone is on the same page and is using all strategies and steps to meet the language translation needs of our parents. 2018-19 CEP 163 
