2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R039 School Name: P.S. 39 FRANCIS J. MURPHY JR. Principal: TRACEY WRIGHT 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Francis J. Murphy School 31R039 School Number (DBN): 353100010039 K-5 71 Sand Lane, Staten Island, NY 10305 718 447-4543 Phone Number: 718-447-0500 Fax: Keena Flournoy White kflourn@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Tracey Wright Beth Murphy Raquel Capichana Alison Santoriello Raquel Capichana YMCA-Nick Bitetto District Information Geographical District: 31 VincenzaGallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, NY 10305 Superintendent’s Office Address: VGallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 420-5690 Phone Number: Staten Island 7184470500 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Kevin Moran FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island, NY 10310 Kmoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-556-8367 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tracey Wright Beth Murphy RacquelCapichanna Clare Vasconi N/A N/A N/A Nicholas Bitetto Christine Cardone Mesyde Lika Maria DeVito *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Justine Cognato Helen Florez Ciobanescu Lisa LaCapra Dawn Macchia Aldo DiLorenzo Ayineira Dowdell Danielle Dunn Thomas Harkins Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/DC37 Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Public School 39R’s mission is to embrace the needs of each child. We are a diverse group of learners whose members include children, families, school staff and the community. Cooperatively we strive to build a strong foundation for all. Our journey begins by creating a safe and caring environment promoting mutual respect. Our journey continues 2018-19 CEP 9  through rigorous instruction that incorporates different learning styles. Through the workshop and inquiry models, students become partners with their teachers and take ownership of their learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Francis J. Murphy, Jr. School, Public School 39, is located in the town of Arrochar in the borough of Staten Island. Our student population of 543 children is ethnically diverse, consisting of students from Albania, Russia, Asia and Mexico. The school population comprises 6% Black, 29% Hispanic, 52% White, and 12% Asian students, 8% English language learners and 11% special education students. The school services grades Pre K through 5. Our staff consists of 3 administrators, 33 state certified teachers, 6 paraprofessionals, 5 school aides, 2 secretaries, 1 part-time guidance counselor, 1 part-time school psychologist and school social worker and 1 full-time and 1 part-time ESL teacher and 2 speech teachers. Our special events invite families to join us on our journey. We are a bridge that connects social, emotional and academic excellence in preparation for meeting the challenges of the 21st Century. P.S. 39R encourages family involvement because we firmly believe that a strong home-school connection is at the heart of student success. Parents receive tailored workshops around unpacking the common core in Mathematics and ELA . Parents are given resources they can use with their students at home. P.S. 39R is a “Leader In Me” school, We believe in empowering our students to use the 7 Habits while infusing the Emotional Intelligence philosophy. This means that students have multiple opportunities to demonstrate and model their own leadership skills. P.S. 39R believes in infusing the arts in our curriculum. We have partnerships with the YMCA for academic and social supports, Read Alliance, Sun Dog Dance and Theatre for enhancing academic learning through the Arts and the 100 schools pilot for Teacher's College. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 39R provides services for English Language Learners. We have one allocated full-time and 1 part-time ESL teacher that provides push -in and pull-out services for English Language Learners. ELL students participate in a Title III funded after school program for grades 2-5 to target areas of need. The Title III program will target beginner, intermediate and advanced ELL students across the elementary grades that are in need of academic English Language Development. Classes are provided in English with ESL strategic instruction incorporated in all lessons. The program addresses all four modalities of language development and acquisition (listening, speaking, reading and writing), but will mainly focus on reading and writing. The most progress that we have made as a school this year has been the collaborative teacher element. We have built a solid foundation in regards to teacher teams. Even though we established a data team, pd team that is vertical and grade level teams we want to extend the work around teacher teams and create action teams. These action teams will meet organizational, curriculum and systemic structures that as a staff we would like to see implemented throughout our building. Some of the action teams that have come from surveying the staff were revising the school vision, plan and organize school wide celebrations, establish, publicize, clear rubrics and guidelines to highlight student expectations, Create a question bank based on the 7 Habits using an integrated approach to student learning, establishing and publicizing clear ladder of discipline and developing the book of the month list. These teams will have 2018-19 CEP 10  to come up with the plan for each of the above mentioned ideas and plan out the strategies, goals and time lines for the school community to implement. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In the 2017-2018 school year we focused on Rigor and relevance. teachers were able to delve into what it meant to ensure that students had multiple opportunities to engage in meaningful thoughtful activities that lead to discovery and learning on high levels. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R039 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 548 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 28 29 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 33 33 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 63.5% % Reduced Lunch 12.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 30.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 42.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.08 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 44.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 77% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A NO N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 63 65 27 92.9% 4.6% 22.1% 8.8% 16.8% 1.5% 4 9% 5.2 46.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the NYC School Survey 2016- 2017 93% of teachers stated that they have the resources to include opportunities for reading and writing grounded in evidence from text. According to the NYC School Survey 2016-2017 100% of teachers say they have the resources to include opportunities for developing students conceptual, procedural, and applied skills in math. According to the QR 2017-2018 1.1. Pedagogy-There is some evidence of delivery and instruction providing multiple entry points for students. There is some evidence of application of differentiation and other instructional strategies to provide appropriately challenging tasks that promotes high achievement. There is some evidence that some classrooms provide opportunity in student discussion. There was some evidence of opportunity to use turn and talk and text based evidence. In Math class there is some evidence of tiered questions and challenged engagement. Teachers use student work and assessment data to drive instruction. Teacher teams self assess using data and student work in order to revise and align curriculum resources. Specific instructional materials were available and accessible for all learners including ENLs and SWDs . Teachers incorporate targeted vocabulary within their lessons that support language acquisition. The school provides a strong phonics foundation in lower grades implementing Orton Gillingham strategies. According to the Quality Review 2017-2018 we have rubrics and success criteria aligned to student work. We identify where students are currently performing and there is some use of exit slips and checklists to self assess and check for understanding. Teachers use observation as a form of assessment. 3.4 Teachers hold students accountable. Students are aware of the skills necessary to move to the next level. Teachers and other staff share insights into the next grade level in reference to what students need to know to be successful. Build effective instruction based on rigorous and relevant expectations. • Possess and continue to develop content area knowledge and make it relevant to the learner • Create and implement an effective learner environment that is engaging and 2018-19 CEP 13  aligned to learner needs • Plan and provide learning experiences using effective research-based strategies that are embedded with best practices, including the use of technology • Use assessment and data to guide and scaffold instruction • Further content and instructional knowledge through continuous professional learning that is both enriching and collaborative 2. Higher Order Questions, more student led discussions, more opportunities for critical thinking, specific actionable feedback to students on what they need to do to achieve their next steps. Student self assessment, deeper understanding of the Success Criteria for both students and teachers, unevenness in assessment and pedagogy- We need to build common practices in instructional practices the application of differentiation Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will establish a more even application of instructional practices across grades K through 5. 70% of our pedagogy according to the Danielson framework (3b, 3c, and 3d) will be consistent in using Success Criteria that aligns to the progressions, differentiation, higher-order questions, student led discussions, and student self-assessment that will lead to more opportunities for students to engage in critical thinking by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  In the 2018-2019 school year we will ccontinue professional development sessions in unpacking the standards and identifying success criteria with supplemental resources. This will be completed in six to eight week cycles. In the 2018-2019 school year teachers will be provided time to plan lessons around success criteria and supplement resources such as rubrics, and checklists. Teachers will ensure that rigorous and relevant activities are being provided for students throughout all subject areas. In the 2018-2019 school year inter-visitations will take place for teachers to see the success criteria, rigor and relevant activities, etc is used on classrooms within their grades and vertically. In the 2018-2019 school year as a professional learning community, our school will refine our efforts in ensuring that our curriculum units have rigorous and relevant project based learning opportunities for all students. We will ensure that the students have opportunities to self assess and provide feedback to the teachers for improvement. These suggestions will be taken into consideration and unit plans will be revised to ensure that rigor and relevance is inputted in the unit. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers, Paraprofessional, administrators bi-weekly Administrators, PD Team, Grade Leaders, Data Team All teachers, Paraprofessional, administrators weekly Administrators, PD Team, Grade Leaders, Data Team All teachers, Paraprofessional, administrators bi-weekly Administrators, PD Team, Grade Leaders, Data Team All teachers, Paraprofessional, administrators bi-weekly Administrators, PD Team, Grade Leaders, Data Team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide opportunities for parents to learn more about Rigorous Instruction during Welcome Back to School Curriculum Night in September which is conducted by all teachers. In addition parents will be invited to school during Open School Week in November to see Rigorous Instruction in action. Teachers will provide workshops during Parent Engagement in various subject areas 1 per semester. Parents will be invited to Student Led Conferences during the March Parent Teacher Conference. Parents will be invited to debrief with the teacher after participating in the curriculum night/parent teacher night. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will be provided professional development in text based discussions during the Monday professional development sessions as well as during their common planning periods. Teachers are provided on each grade level two common planning periods a week. This allows for inter-visitations, lesson planning and debriefing sessions where teachers can hone in on refining their practices. Substitute teachers will be hired using Title I and Tax Levy funds in order for teachers to be able to participate in inter-visitations, lesson planning and debriefing sessions where teachers can home in on refining their practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Quarterly teachers, and administrators will collect evidence of this work through conducting learning walks and student work during the months of November, February, April, and June 2018. We wil look at the evidence and recalibrate Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Inter-visitations, formal and informal observations will be used to measure the success of implementation of the progress of assessment capable learners and rigorous opportunities. All constituents will use an implementation rubric and provide teachers immediate feedback. The feedback will be captured and calculated to provide administrators feedback on the progression of implementation. The instrument that will be used us an observation checklist list. Using the observation checklists it will show that 40% of the teachers are implementing the strategies for 3a to 3c) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS 39 has been a Leader-in-Me school since September 2012. Students and staff have been learning and working with the 7 Habits of Effective People. We have decided to place more structures and strategies in place to support the work. Our planned next steps to guide the teachers towards helping students understand the appropriate times and places to use their empowered voices. One of the strategies that would be used is the PEACE path to empower students to deal with conflicts peer to peer. All staff, including school aides were trained in TCIS. Staff will use these strategies to deescalate conflicts and provide students with strategies on how to deal with their feelings and deal with them appropriately. Staff members will use Life Space Interviews and incident report to demonstrate their contribution to resolving conflicts with students. Students will complete a daily tally chart to record when they use the peace path strategy to solve their problems. 1. According to the 2016-2017 Framework for Great Schools, 97% the teaching staff at PS 39 feel that the students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms and cafeteria. 100% teachers that adult teach students how to advocate for themselves and 87% of teachers says that students feel that it is important to come to school everyday. 2. As the data has shown in the 2016-2017 Framework for Great Schools, our students are able to advocate for 3. themselves. Therefore, we would like to have our students use their voices (Habit #8) to advocate for the safety of their environment, by creating the guidelines and expectations for their peers. In the 2017-2018 school year, PS39 was awarded with the title of being a “Lighthouse School”. In order to continue our practices as a Leader In Me school, and to ensure that we are supporting the whole child, we have established differentiated structures and practices. These applications are in place to build the characters of our students, while meeting the needs of our diverse population. Using positive reinforcement such as Class Dojo Points, “Caught Doing Good Fish”, and the use of the Kindness Challenge, we are promoting citizenship and allowing students to develop morals and values. With the incorporation of PBIS, teachers and students will have another support system to ensure the safety, and management of our building. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019 80% of the teaching staff will follow through on executing the strategies through students led activities. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  With the incorporation of PBIS, teachers and students will have another support system to ensure the safety, and management of our building. Through teacher selection, a committee of students will be created to help in the designing of rubrics and expectant behaviors checklist throughout the school environment. The whole student population will be introduced to these new regulations. Rubrics and checklists will have visual aides. Translation will be created for our ELL students. An assembly will be put in place (per grade) to introduce the established expectations with the use of a PowerPoint Presentation. (This will be shared with the entire staff) Students with disabilities (SWD) and ELL students will be given multiple supports in order to further their understanding. Students will be selected in June 2018. The end date of the establishing of rules will be by the first week of September 2018. The Leadership Impact Steering Committee will consist of the principal and three teachers; Ms. Wright, Ms. Fiorello, Ms. Jablin, Ms. Lane. The mentoring team will consist of volunteering staff members including but not limited to assistant principals, teachers, paraprofessionals and school aides. Environmental Enhancers (creating the signs) The Lighthouse Team will be monthly to discuss the effectiveness of the new expectations. A separate committee consisting of administration, teacher volunteers and selected students will oversee the creation of the guidelines 2018-19 CEP 18  In partnership between students and staff, we will establish and publicize a clear ladder of discipline for PS 39 based on the Citywide Behavioral Expectations to Support Student Learning. Each location within the building including the school yards will have a set of aligned guidelines expectations that all students should abide by. Students will also assist in developing a plan of action in the event that the guidelines and expectations are not respected. PS 39 teachers, administrators, parent coordinator, counselors, etc. Resource will be used weekly starting September 2018 to June 2019. This will serve as a resource for both staff, family and students to clearly understand interventions and consequences that may be implemented as a result of students inability to fulfill their responsibilities. Describe how you will involve, engage, and educate families to deepen their understanding of a Supportive Environment so that they can support their children at home. PS 39 teachers, administrators, parent coordinator, counselors, etc. This will be implemented monthly from September 2018 to June 2019. and the continuing application of it. The school administrative team, guidance counselor and psychologist will work with a team of teachers to develop this plan and share it with both the staff and community We will communicate monthly with parents about curriculum, classroom expectations and ways parent can become involved through our parent monthly newsletters that are customized by grade. Parents will also be informed about the Kindness Challenges in school, so that this can be followed through at home. School wide we offer course around the common core for parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide parents with an opportunity to learn more about the Leader In Me Practices. The Leader In Me workbooks will be going home for homework also. This will also allow parents to see how their child practices the 7 Habits + 1 in school. Parent Newsletters will be going home every month to ensure communication. Leader In Me 2018-19 CEP 19  Workshops will be given to parents. (Rosemarie DiFilippi to organize) The goal is to have 3-5 opportunities for parents to come in and learn with their child within different subject areas. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Through a grant funded initiative, teachers will receive follow up professional development and classroom demonstrations in support of the TCIS initiative. Substitute teachers will be hired to cover dents for those days. In addition to this opportunity, teachers will have certain Monday professional development times devoted to this important work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Benchmark 1; November 2018- Tracking forms for Peace Path Tally chart and SWISS forms will be reviewed to determine the effective tracking of incidents in the school that are occurring and being addressed.The expectation is that 25% of the staff will implement the TCIS and PBIS strategies. Benchmark 2: January, 2019-Tracking forms for Peace Path Tally chart and SWISS forms will be reviewed to determine the effective tracking of incidents in the school that are occurring and being addressed. The expectation is that 35% of the staff will implement the TCIS and PBIS strategies. Benchmark 3- March 2019 - Tracking forms for Peace Path Tally chart and SWISS forms will be reviewed to determine the effective tracking of incidents in the school that are occurring and being addressed. The expectation is that 55% of the staff will implement the TCIS and PBIS strategies. Benchmark 4- May 2019 Tracking forms for Peace Path Tally chart and SWISS forms will be reviewed to determine the effective tracking of incidents in the school that are occurring and being addressed. The expectation is that 70% of the staff will implement the TCIS and PBIS strategies. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Tracking forms for Peace Path Tally chart and SWISS forms will be used to provide monthly and annual data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Another strength that was captured in the QR was Indicator 4.2. All of our teachers were engaged in inquiry-based, structured professional collaborations and vested in increasing school-wide coherence and student achievement. Teachers take on leadership roles and are integral in key decisions that affect student learning. The principal created a schedule where teachers meet in a variety of team configurations including inquiry, grade and data meetings. As part of inquiry, teachers and paraprofessionals work with their grade team to analyze student work and plan instruction. They share findings, generate teaching points and plan strategic supports to meet students’ needs. In addition to the team meetings, each grade has two common preparation periods weekly to meet and share strategies for instruction. Each grade also has a built in data prep 1 time per week that allows them to look at data and plan lessons based on the numbers. 1 The data team also meets weekly to gather and organize classroom data and then share through Google docs for planning needs based learning. The school’s most recent New York City school survey indicates that 90% of the teachers agree that working together on teams improves their instructional practice. By June 2019 , the assessment team will be able to develop rigorous, common core aligned assessments that will support the work we are doing around establishing and developing assessment capable learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100 % of our teachers will participate in action teams that will work on various aspects of our school community. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Action Team Sign up Each grade will have a specialist for the following areas: All teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators May 2018- June 2018 Assistant Principal, Lighthouse Team Reading Writing Science/Social Studies Mathematics Data Team Assessment Team Action Team Initial Meeting to Set goals and create an action plan. These goals will be revisited Action Team meets to plan around Leader In Me rubric evaluating what is in place and what needs to be in Action Teams are employed to ensure that they work on three areas of need applicable to their team assignments. All teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators In the month of June 2018 Assistant Principal, Lighthouse Team & in the month of September 2018 weekly in the month of September 2018 This will occur monthly Sept. 2018- Nov. 2018 All teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators All teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators Assistant Principal, Lighthouse Team Assistant Principal, Lighthouse Team 2018-19 CEP 22 All action teams will receive detailed feedback on their performance and areas of impact through learning walks. And will be employed to refine what they worked on in regards to areas of need. All teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators Consultants from LIM will provide specified feedback around the operations and implementation of the LIM initiative and provide training, learning walks, and next steps. All teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators This will occur monthlly Nov 2018- Dec 2018 Assistant Principal, Lighthouse Team, Action Teams All Staff Bi monthly Assistant Principal, Lighthouse Team, Action Teams All Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will have an informational meeting during the Back to School Night in September to discuss with families about the departmentalization of 4th & 5th grades and grade K-3 will inform families about the curriculum that will be implemented in their classrooms throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In our school's master schedule, every month there is one Monday allocated for teachers to plan and meet around their action teams. There is also a rotation schedule for teams to meet once a month on Wednesdays. Each teacher will have a data period to review their data and to review the quality of assessments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we will have conducted 3 parent workshops that engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers. These strategies will promote teacher-parent/family collaborations to support their children at home. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 23  Parents will be given a survey to indicate their thoughts about the information they have received from the parent workshops and if they thought the information was relevant. The survey would also include if parents felt that the times if the parent workshops that were available were convenient. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2017 school quality snapshot, 97% of the teachers say the Principal created a clear vision for the school and 94% of parents feel that the principal creates a sense of community in the school. For the current CEP dated January 2018, P.S. 39 is well-developed in 1.3, making strategic and organizational decisions. Teachers engage in learning walks and students use resources to reach their goals, including manipulatives and technology and are aware of the skills needed to advance. P.S.39 has partnered with I.C.L.E. and consultant Mark White to brand the school and improve rigor and relevance in instruction with an emphasis on technology. The Leader in Me curriculum and RULER strategies provide positive language and self-talk that assists students in social and emotional learning. In addition, staff is trained in TCIS and have an array of tools to use to help students recognize, understand, label, express and regulate their emotions. The Positive Learning Collaborative has conducted different levels of Professional development over the past three years that includes self-care that includes yoga and meditation techniques for our staff. We have engaged in Community Circles with the staff and turnkeyed it to the students to enrich our parallel journeys. The next step of our work with PLC (The Positive Learning Collaborative) will be the implementation of PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention Supports). We have established a PBIS team and will receive training in the summer to roll out implementation. There is a cadre of students we have recognized this year as having very high needs of the area of social-emotional development. Students have entered the school in grades 4 and 5 and have not had the benefit that out homegrown students have had with the positive programs we follow. We are working to align our resources in order to organize a course for new admits to help them acclimate to our environment as well as an additional day of counseling (for “at-risk” students). Our school is well-developed in QR Indicator 3.4. School leaders and teachers engage in high-quality collaborative learning opportunities establishing a culture of professionalism. As an administrative team we conduct observations and snapshot visits and provide actionable feedback using the Danielson Framework for Teaching. In order to enhance 4e, the action feedback includes teachers to research articles and professional videos in the areas need for improvement. For example, they do this to move from developing to effective and effective to highly-effective. With the influx of new staff members, there is a need to provide opportunities to interact with the Danielson Rubric and promote intervisitations in order to deepen staff understanding of the domains and components they are rated on. Through the observation feedback cycles in 2017-2018, there has been an improvement in Domains 1 and 3. We will continue to support teachers in Domains 1 and 3 and monitor student progress in order to nurture individual agency and build collective capacity for our teachers. The data team will lead the charge in our focus on the creation of actionable feedback through progressions, success criteria, and other tools for assessment in instruction. We will align our resources to support this work. One Monday PD session/month will be devoted to Danielson and intervisitations. Another Monday PD session/month will be devoted to the development of assessment tools for the purpose of deepening the understanding of administrators, teachers and students. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 25  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will deepen and develop a shared understanding of the Danielson Tool focusing on using assessment in instruction and questioning and discussion techniques so that 80% of the teachers are rated Effective or Highly Effective. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development and Intervisitation sessions will be provided around Danielson Domains 1 and 3 Infusion of rigor and relevance and DOK in both domains. All teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators This will occur monthly All classroom teachers, Grade Specialists, and administrators. ProProfessional development sessions will be provided around Parent and Family Engagement Workshops in SEL, Crisis Intervention, RTI, and ESL All teachers, paraprofessionals, parent coordinator and administrators Professional development will be devoted to Monday PD sessions (one per month) to Danielson, intervisitations and development of assessment tools for the purpose of deepening the understanding of administrators, teachers and students. All teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators Professional development sessions will be provided around conferencing in Reading, Writing, and Mathematics in order to refine pedagogical practices in using assessment to provide effective re-teaching opportunities. All teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators September 2018 - October 2018 This will occur bi- monthly during the months of October 2018 - May 2019 - This will occur weekly during the months of September 2018 - May 2019 This will occur monthly during the months of Sept 2018 to May 2019 All classroom teachers, Grade Specialists, and administrators. All classroom teachers, Grade Specialists, and administrators. Teachers College Consultants - Hannah Kolbo and Casey Maxwell, Administration and vertical team representatives for reading, writing and Social Studies subject areas. A4all coaches, teachers, math teachers in 2018-19 CEP 27 Professional Development sessions will be provided around TCIS, refresher course in TCIS, RULER and Leader in Me. All staff - Differentiation based on level of need Professional Development sessions will be provided for PBIS. All staff grades 4 and 5, and vertical team representatives for math PLC, SIBFSC Staff, YALE, EI RULER consultants and LIM consultants. PLC, SIBFSC Staff, PBIS team This will occur bi weekly during the months of June 2018, November 2018, TBA Team Training - May 2018 overview Summer 2018 Training for PBIS Roll out - Fall 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In the Spring of 2018, the Data team undertook the task of developing a new school-wide grading and promotional policy, aligned with the CCLS at the behest of the NYCDOE. Through this process, the Data Team has deepened their understanding and focused on a common language from grade to grade of students’ components of learning according to the subject area. The team, which includes administration and teachers, will be responsible for communicating these new expectations and policies through the S.L.T., PTA, Family nights and Parent Engagement time. We will provide parents with monthly opportunities with interactive workshops to expose and teach the social-emotional programs utilized at P.S.39. The crisis team will provide three workshops on how to assist their child with a crisis. The RTI team will provide three workshops on how to support their child at home by teaching learning strategies for students with special needs. These workshops will begin in October of 2018 and end in May of 2019. ENL teachers will provide three workshops on how to support their child at home by teaching learning strategies for Ells. The JCC, if funded, will provide ESL classes for parents and community members. The workshops will be taught in families’ native language. These strategies will support parent leadership and engagement by communicating high expectations and practical application of learning strategies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 28  We will use Monday professional development session times as well as scheduling during the day time for inter-visitations by utilizing substitute teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Benchmark 1: May 2018 - November 2018 - 100% of all teachers will engage in creating curriculum maps in Reading, Writing and Math and refining lesson plans. Teachers will participate in one intervisitation looking at 1a and 1e focusing on Domain 1, specifically 1a (Demonstrating Knowledge and Pedagogy- Content Knowledge, Prerequisite relationships and content pedagogy) and 1e (Designing Coherent Instruction - Learning Activities, instructional materials and resources, instructional grouping and lesson and unit structures). We will have 100% of all curriculum maps updated for the first and second semester of school. Benchmark 1a: May 2018 - November 2018 - The Data Team will complete the grading and promotional policy and turnkey to the staff. In October of 2018, they will turnkey the policies to the parents at the S.L.T., PTA, and Parent Engagement Workshops. Benchmark 1b: June 2018 - The Crisis team will plan a timeline for implementation of Social-Emotional workshops for SY 2018/2019 Benchmark 1c: 2018 - The ENL and Speech teams will plan a timeline for implementation of ESL workshops for staff and parents. Benchmark 2: December 2018 - All teachers will participate in one intervisitation focusing on 3c (Engaging Students in Learning - activities and assignments, student groupings, instructional materials and resources and student participation) Benchmark 3: January 2019 - All teachers will participate in one intervisitation focusing on 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction), assessment in criteria, monitoring of student learning, feedback to students, and students self-assessment and monitoring. Benchmark 4- February 2019 - All teachers will participate in one intervisitation focusing on Domain 3b (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques - Quality of questions, discussion techniques and student participation) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Observation Data and Workshop Surveys via Google Docs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2016-17 School Quality snapshot, 94% responded positively to questions about strong family-community ties. 91% of the parents feel that the staff regularly communicates about how they can help them learn. Another area was parents communicating with their child’s teacher about their child’s performance and PS 39 scored a 94% compared to the city average of 93%. The area where teachers say that teachers at the school work closely with families to meet student needs, PS 39 rated at 100% compared to the city’s average of 97%. Parents have partnered with our school community in participating in academic events such as Math game night where parents and students engage in mathematical thinking and having fun. Parents also participate in our literacy /coding night where students and parents come to school at night and teachers read stories to families and teach them basic coding skills. Other events that build parent and school connections are Student led conferences, Movie Night, performances by students through the arts such as drama and band, Mother’s Day Muffins with Mom, gingerbread house making and the Wellness Committee resource fair, Father’s Day Donuts with Dad and a family Bingo Night. According to the 2016-17, we are under the city average by 2% of parents that say staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their children learn. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will use Class Dojo, phone blasts, school website, and written correspondence to regularly communicate with our parents. From the feedback that we have received from parents, they desire to have more workshops available to them around the curricula and the standards and they also enjoy coming to their child’s publishing parties and seeing their work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 39 will provide three to five opportunities for parents to engage in their children's learning environment throughout the year and have 25% parent participation. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A year long calendar 2018-2019 would be created all of the school events and placed on the website as well sent home before the beginning of each Parents, Teachers and Administrators Monthly Sept. 2018-June 2018 Administrators, Lighthouse Team, SLT month. By the 3rd Saturday of the preceding month, the following month’s calendar will be posted on the school website. Planning time would be allocated for teachers to prepare for the math, reading, coding and writing workshops that will be provided for parents to assist them in understanding the standards, expectations for grade level mastery, and common core. Teachers will also be provided time to plan and schedule the publishing parties that compliment each grade level unit. Posters for the workshops will be advertised throughout the school, school website, Class Dojo and phone blasts. SIgn up sheets for events will be posted at the time the calendar gets posted on the website. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents, Teachers and Administrators Monthly Sept. 2018 - Teachers and Administrators June 2019 Parents, Teachers and Administrators Monthly Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers and Administrators If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents As Arts Partners, Jewish Board, Staten Island Mental Health / RUMC, READ Alliance Inc., Illuminart, NYPD - “To Good For Drugs”, Boys Scouts of America, Sundog, Education Through Music, SI Foundation, YMCA Counseling, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday professional development sessions are one the resources that we will use in order to support our action plan. Our resources researched based materials , administration and other staff to prepare and present for parent involvement activities, publishing parties,etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 31  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Benchmark 1: November 2016- All teachers would have participated in an (1) inter-visitation looking at the Success Criteria in Reading, Writing, Mathematics and or Science/Social Studies. All teachers would have received at least one informal observation with tailored feedback around this work. Benchmark 2: January, 2017-All teachers would have participated in two inter-visitations looking at the Success Criteria in Reading, Writing, Mathematics and or Science/Social Studies. All teachers would have received at least two formal/ informal observation with tailored feedback around this work Benchmark 3- March 2017, All teachers would have participated in three inter-visitations looking at the Success Criteria in Reading, Writing, Mathematics and or Science/Social Studies. All teachers would have received at least three formal/ informal observation with tailored feedback around this work Benchmark 4- May 2017, All teachers would have participated in four inter-visitations looking at the Success Criteria in Reading, Writing, Mathematics and or Science/Social Studies. All teachers would have received at least four formal/ informal observation with tailored feedback around this work. Teachers will make reflect on the job embedded professional development implementation this year and create action plans for continued professional development the 2017/2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the Danielson Framwork and the learning walk tools for the intervisitations to assess the progress and growth in staff pedogogue. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) If Running record Assessment results are level 1 students will be placed in a Pre and Post Unit assessments show no extensive growth and students are still a level 1. Unit Assessments and Pre and Post Summative Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Leveled Library Intervention One to one and small group Orton Gillingham Before school, during school and after school One to one and small group During the school day and after school Read Supplemental Materials and Great Leaps Fractionation Waggle 2018-19 CEP 33  Science Supplemental Materials Small Group During the school day Social Studies Pre and Post Unit Assessments and a Pre and Post Summative Assessments Pre and Post Unit Assessments and a Pre and Post Summative Assessments Supplemental Materials Small Group At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are having a difficult time adjusting At risk counseling One to one and small group During the school day During the school day 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have sixteen students that are currently in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We plan to designate a homeless liaison for our school. Meet with homeless families and inform them if the McKinney-Vento Act . We will disseminate McKinney-Vento posters in our school by the exists. Ensure that we arrange transportation (yellow bus or MetroCards in NYC to assist students with immediate enrollment. Follow up to see if families need assistance with locating: 1) school records, 2) medical records/immunizations; 3) proof of residency; 4) guardianship papers; 5) birth certificates or other documents normally needed . We will also provide priority placement for students if they need tutoring and/or related support services, free school lunch, Special Education, school supplies and Summer Programs Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Highly qualified teachers are drawn to PS 39 because of the wonderful climate for learning that has been created at the school. Teachers know that students come to PS 39 to learn and it’s their job to give them multiple opportunities to grow. The qualified teachers choose to stay because of the intense professional development opportunities and PLCs that have been created over the past 6 years. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). During the 2018-2019 school year teachers will engage in professional development that allows them to unpack the common core, create assessment capable learners, view best practices that engage students in the teaching process. Teachers will also received differentiated support in the areas that were identified through the initial teacher conferences, last year's advance data and what teachers identified as a need. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-K students and parents are provided an orientation opportunity of the school during the month of May. They visit our "Leader In Me" Showcase Day where they can visit classes and see instruction. We have also changed the Pre- k curriculum to align to our grade K curriculum so that the Pre-k Students are prepared to matriculate to our Kindergarten classes. This curriculum is common core aligned and places an emphasis on vocabulary, language acquisition and text based discussions. The Pre K curriculum is tailored to the readiness skills that students need in order to matriculate into Kindergarten. Parents are offered the opportunity to attend parent workshops to see the demands of the Common Core State standards. They are provided with activities they can do at home that will enhance learning opportunities within the classroom and prepare students for Kindergarten. The Pre K students are also infused in units that are common core based and aligned to what they need to know in K as well as develop their socio-emotional skills to adjust to the upcoming demands in K through 5. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are provided the opportunity to explore various assessments either on line through the core program or create assessments that are common core aligned. Teachers receive on going professional development through out the year, at minimum, three times a year. Teachers engage in the different types of summative and formative assessment and how they aid in guiding instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Funding Amount Indicate the amount Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and 2018-19 CEP 38  Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 0 x x x x Professional Development, Supplies and Materials ENL After school program 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 CEP 39   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 39, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 39 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 41  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, during the school day, parent engagement time and evenings, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; * Invite Parents to be a part of our annual Leadership showcase day * Invite Families to academic celebrations such as writing publishing parties ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area and lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter and maintaining a school website designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 39, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2018-19 CEP 43  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 45  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; * understand the 7 habits my children are learning in school Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. * utilize the 7 Habits as a student and school community member 2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: PS 39 Francis J. Murphy School This school is (check one): DBN: 31R039 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 2 2 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: transitioning acquisition Rationale: P.S. 39 will provide a Title III funded after school for grades K-5 ELL students. This after school program will target language acquisition skills, reading, writing, and mathematics skills that will enable students to increase in their reading acquisition through running records, their end of the unit assessments in reading, writing and mathematics and overall receive preparation for the necessary skills to do well in the NYSESLAT, and the NYS Math and ELA exams. The students will meet for three days a week , two hours each day on Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from 2:30 pm- 4:30 pm. Parents will be notified of this opportunity in multiple languages of the student's progress to keep the parents informed. The Title III program will target entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding ELL students across the elementary grades who are in need of academic English Language Development. Classes will be provided in English with ENL strategic instruction incorporated in all lessons. The program will address all four modalities of language development and acquisition (listening, speaking, reading and writing), but will mainly focus on reading and writing in both the ELA and math content areas. The utilization of station teaching and the In looking at the NYSESLAT student performance data from 2017-2018, it shows that most ELL students at P.S. 39 across all grade bands are scoring Advanced or Proficient in the targeted areas of speaking and listening, but not achieving the same level on the reading and writing sections. WE can say that this year we did have a 25% percent increase of students that totally tested out of their need of ENL support. This is a great increase from previous years. All the programs that we are using is different from the programs that we are using during the day. This school year we would like to focus on our transitioning and expanding population. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The teaching staff will only include 2 certified ENL teachers. A supervisor will oversee instruction, scheduling, coordination of program activity and professional development. The program will start October, 2018 to June 2019 with a celebration of the work that students have accomplished at the end of the program. The principal will assume the responsibilities of the program supervisor. Title III funds will not be used to supervise the program. Our goal is for 40% or more of our ELLs to move at least one category according to the 2018 NYSESLAT assessment. The trend of our ELLs is that they remain in expanding (advanced) and not move to commanding (proficient) due to their reading and writing skills. During the after school program for grades K through 5 , the students will use the tool “Language Power”, Mathletics,, and other web based programs at appropriate levels as well as a variety of big books and Reader’s Theater to assist the teacher in delivering instruction. The goal for each group is to improve their language skills in the four modalities of Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing. The instructional focus of each group will be based on the groups' data. The group for grades 3-5 will focus on composing and organizing sentences and thoughts to form paragraphs. These paragraphs will include topic sentences and at least 2 supporting details. Students performing at the Transitioning and Expanding phase will receive explicit instruction on vocabulary development and oral language skills through small group discussion using research based models such as Frayer and picture cues. They will work on composing simple sentences using learned vocabulary words and phrases taught in the program. They will also work on reading and understanding very short sentences on learned topics using vocabulary and structure learned through Language Power. They will focus on using the writing process to construct an essay. they will also work toward writing a simple outline that will assist them in practicing giving an oral presentation. Through the use of Language Power along with direct instruction, our ELLs will have numerous opportunities in improving their reading. There will be a 12:1 ratio in both groups and two classes will be open. The group for grades K, 1, and 2 will work on expanding their vocabulary and reading fluency through read alouds and Reader’s Theater. These programs will help our ELLs gain confidence in reading and also allow them to learn reading skills. Students will also be asked to re-tell the story after they listen to it to work on not just their comprehension but also their oral skills. Research shows that oracy needs to come before literacy for students, especially ELLs, to be successful in academics. This group will be given the opportunity to do oral presentations for their classmates Student Attendance is recorded on an after school attendance sheet that is collected daily. Students that do not attend are followed up with a phone call to ensure that they will attend or their spot is given to another student in need. All students will work in small groups using literature that aligns with the school curriculum and standards for ELLs. By using those specific materials, our students will be utilizing the computer, listening centers and writing activities. Engaging the students with fiction and non-fiction hands-on activities in varying content areas will expose them to academically rigorous language in English, therefore, allowing for student growth equal to and above that of our native language speakers in the New York State standardized exams. There will also be a component of homework help in the ELL academy. Participation in the academy will be voluntary but strongly suggested. 2018-19 CEP 50 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Ongoing ESL Professional Development is important to all teachers on staff to equip them with the tools to educate the ELLs that are in their classrooms. Teachers will be given opportunities to attend workshops provided by the NYC Office of English Language Learners throughout the year. Our Title III staff development will continue to focus on strengthening the teaching and learning of ELLs using research based strategies. For professional development, the ESL teacher will use the DOE website which contains videos and articles to support the 2 classroom teachers with developing the literacy of our ELLs along with her own prior knowledge about challenges facing teaching students who are not English proficient. Teachers will also use these instructional tools to write integrated theme based units which will increase students’ vocabulary and expand students’ language acquisition through content area reading and writing. Some of these lessons will include the use of graphic organizers for writing of narratives, essays, and math stories with the aid of math manipulatives. Student data gathered from TC running records, ELA, NYSELSAT, and State Math exams will inform teachers of the needs of our students. The intention of the study group is for teachers to increase their understanding and use of research based strategies for ELLs and in turn increase the achievement of the participating students in NYSESLAT, and the NYS Mathematics and ELA exams. The teachers will meet once a month on the following schedule: Workshop #1 Date/ Time: November 13, 2018 @ 2:30 p.m. Title: Effective Language Acquisition Strategies for ELLs in Mathematics Description: Teachers will review the students data that they will service and engage in pd session around fix up strategies for the students they will service. They will also plan using the data and resources that the program provides. Faciliator: ESL Specialist Participants: Teachers in Title III program and other teachers, site supervisor Workshop#2 Date/Time: December 4, 2018 @2:30 p.m. Ongoing ESL Professional Development is important to all teachers on staff to equip them with the tools to educate the ELLs that are in their classrooms. Teachers will be given opportunities to attend workshops provided by the NYC Office of English Language Learners throughout the year. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part C: Professional Development Our Title III staff development will continue to focus on strengthening the teaching and learning of ELLs using research based strategies. For professional development, the ESL teacher will use the DOE website which contains videos and articles to support the 2 classroom teachers with developing the literacy of our ELLs along with her own prior knowledge about challenges facing teaching students who are not English proficient. Teachers will also use these instructional tools to write integrated theme based units which will increase students’ vocabulary and expand students’ language acquisition through content area reading and writing. Some of these lessons will include the use of graphic organizers for writing of narratives, essays, and math stories with the aid of math manipulatives. Student data gathered from TC running records, ELA, NYSELSAT, and State Math exams will inform teachers of the needs of our students. The intention of the study group is for teachers to increase their understanding and use of research based strategies for ELLs and in turn increase the achievement of the participating students in NYSESLAT, and the NYS Mathematics and ELA exams. The teachers will meet once a month on the following schedule: Date/ Time: January 8, 2019 Title: Effective Language Acquisition Strategies for Ells using Leveled Readers Description: Teachers will review the students data that they will service and engage in pd session around fix up strategies for the students they will service. They will also plan using the data and resources that the program provides. Faciliator: ESL Specialist Participants: Teachers in Title III program, teachers of other content areas, and the site supervisor Date/Time: February 12, 2019 Title: How Phonological teaching improves ELL literacy? Part I Description: Participants will learn how phonological awareness spans across languages and aids ELL students to decode text when provided explicit instruction in phonemic awareness and phonics. Faciliator: Keena Flournoy White, site supervisor Participants:Teachers in Title III program, other teachers , and site supervisor Date/ Time: March 12, 2019 Title: How Phonological teaching improves ELL literacy? Part II Description: Participants will learn how phonological awareness spans across languages and aids ELL students to decode text when provided explicit instruction in phonemic awareness and phonics. Faciliator: Keena Flournoy White, site supervisor Participants:Teachers in Title III program, site supervisor Date/Time: April 9, 2019 @2:30 p.m. Title: Interactive reading Strategies for Emergent Readers – Part I Description: Participants will learn various phonics and fluency strategies to teach ELL students how to read print. Faciliator: ESL Specialist Participants: Teachers in Title III program, site supervisor Date/Time: May 14, 2019@2:30 p.m. Title:Interactive reading Strategies for Emergent Readers- Part II Description: Participants will learn various reading comprehension strategies to teach ELL students how to read and understand text. Facilitator: Keena Flournoy White, site supervisor 2018-19 CEP 52  Part C: Professional Development Participants: Teachers in Title III program, site supervisor Date/Time: June 11, 2019 @ 2:30 p.m. Title: Looking Ahead Description: Participants will reflect on the student progress, the flow of the program and how to enhance the program for the next year. Facilitator: Tracey Wright, Principal Participants: Teachers in Title III program, site supervisor All records of the professional development sessions include agenda, materials and attendance sheets will be kept in a binder for review. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The education of an ELL is very important and the involvement of their parents will impact their achievement. Some of our ELL parents are new to the NYC school system and even new to the English language. As a school, we feel it is our responsibility to provide the tools to our ELL parents to help their child achieve success in their education. One day per month an ELL parent workshop will be held to focus on the following as well as topics that are generated from parent surveys: The parent coordinator, school administrators and the ESL teacher, will lead these workshops for the parents. Parents will be notified by letters that will be sent home in the language they preferred to be contacted with on the home language form that is in their child's cumulative folder. The Read Program will host regular attendance certificate ceremonies for students and parents and also welcome parent visits throughout the program. A binder with attendance sheets , invitations, agendas and artifiacts will be kept in a binder. The notifications or parents for these workshops will be provided in various languages. All after school sessions for parents will take place on Tuesdays at 2:25PM-3:35PM (No funding needed) Workshop #1 – Strategies on how to make my child a better reader Faciliator: Keena Flournoy White, Supervisor Description: Parents will be provided simple strategies that they can apply every day while running errands. February 13 – What can I do to help my child improve their writing? Faciliator: Keena Flournoy White, Supervisor Description: Parents will be provided activities, simple strategies and discussion prompts they can use to help their children to become better writers. March 13 – How can I prepare my child for the NYSESLAT? Faciliator: Keena Flournoy White, Supervisor 2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Description: Parents will be provided an overview of what the NYSELAT assesses and what the results tell them where their child is in the continuum of learning English. April 17 – Helpful websites for English Language Learners Faciliator- Keena Flournoy White, Supervisor Description: Review of free websites geared for parents and students to use to practice English. May 15 – What do parents of ELLs need from the schools to help them and their children succeed? Faciliator: Keena Flournoy White, Supervisor Description: Participants will engage in various strategies on how to help their child at home. June 5 – How can I help my child stay academically motivated over the summer? Faciliator: Keena Flournoy White, Supervisor Description: Participants will engage in various activities on what free activities and trips they can take their children on to continue the language acquisition process.Please indicate how records will be maintained including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents’ preferred languages Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 54  2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Francis J. Murphy Borough Staten Island School Number 39 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tracey Wright Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Beth Murphy Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Friscia/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area Judith Frye/ Special Education Related-Service Provider Jacqueline Lane/Speech Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Keena Flournoy-White Coach type here School Counselor Don Marbury Parent type here Parent Coordinator Rosemarie Defillippi Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 56  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 547 Total number of ELLs 70 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.80% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? As a school we use the Teacher’s College Running Records. This assessment allows us to know if our ELLs are aware of letter names and letter sounds, print concepts, sight word knowledge, as well as Reading Levels. After the assessment is administered this information is shared with the ELL specialist and students are provided direct instruction by their primary teacher and the ELL specialist based on the student’s needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures in place to support this effort are set times for ENL and classroom teachers to meet together to discuss results. Also, the ENL teachers have access to TC Assessment Pro on the computer to find out the students the levels of our 2018-19 CEP 57  ELLs for letter names, sounds, print concepts, sight word knowledge and reading levels. Teachers are also provided additional support via TC professional development both inside and outside of the classroom. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by looking at data from the NYSESLAT which is made available in late August. This data provides annual growth in all four modalities which allows teachers to plan accordingly and focus on the areas of improvement needed by our ELLs. ELA and Math state test scores, benchmark assessments and ELL interim assessments for grades 3-5 are also looked at to measure growth and evaluate the success of our ELL program. In grades K-5, TC levels are looked at for our ELLs to measure their literacy progress throughout the year. In grades K through 2 we carefully look at print concepts, alphabet knowledge, sight words, and Periodic assessments for our ELLs in grades 3-5 are also given throughout the year to get a snapshot of what ELL level they are on. We have also created a data wall for our ELLs in grades 3-5 to pinpoint the areas of improvement to drive instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Interventions that we have in place once the summative data has been gathered are our ELL After School Academy, Max Scholar and Great Leaps. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] A misconception that is going on in schools are that ELLs who are struggling are pushed to receive special education services. At PS 39, we implement the RTI model effectively and ELLs are referred to special education assessment and services only when they demonstrate insufficient progress in classroom level instruction. When an ELL is brought to our attention by the teacher because of their performance in class, our team first looks at the instructional core in the classroom. The way the child performs in alignment with the classroom achievement as well as compared to other ELLs in the grade level is considered to make an informed assessment of the child. Questions such as "Is instruction targeted to the student's level of English proficiency and learning need?" are asked. The instruction is then looked upon to make sure the ELL is afforded ample opportunities to attain the vocabulary through discussion with peers and teachers. The classrooms have implemented the Socratic Seminar method. The Socratic Seminar is based around discussion but with the use of text to back up the student’s thoughts. These practices are being shared and adopted within all the classrooms throughout the school. All students are given ample opportunities to take part in the discussions. If most ELLs are doing well the next step is to look at drawing on multiple sources of information. To make an informed decision we need to learn about the learner themselves, investigate their classroom experiences and understand their home and community. For example, using text-reading fluency as a reading comprehension as a tool is not a reliable indicator and that is why we use the interim assessments for the upper grades. For the lower grades an underdeveloped oral language means later difficulties and every effort is made to target those areas to help our ELLs. Our team also analyzes data by distinguishing between language acquisition and learning disabilities. A similarity between an ELL and an SWD is that they can both have difficulty remembering sight words but an ELL has difficulty remembering sight words because of not understanding meanings in English. The ELLs are provided with pictures to give a deeper understanding of the word and our Spanish speakers are also provided with the cognates depending on the word. Data shows that when the ELLs are provided multiple times of hearing and seeing the word they are given a better chance of understanding it. When all this data is compiled we provide the ELL with the proper interventions and monitor progress over time. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns across performance levels of the NYSESLAT have revealed the following information. Entering 18.8% Emerging 20.3% Transitioning 2018-19 CEP 58  26.1% Expanding 34.8% Our biggest group of students this year is our expanding group of students in grades K through 5 ( 34.8% -24 students) Our largest population of students this current year is our emerging and transitioning students 46.4% (32 students) . Our students are in need of language acquisition and due to have 23 different languages it is difficult to meet all of their Reading, Writing , Listening, and Speaking. Students need opportunities for engaging in discussion, reading, and writing on a daily basis in order to move each of the above categories. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our school understands that data driven instruction is the way we are able to move our students in levels and helps them make gains in the classroom. With that in mind, classroom teachers were given an extra prep period in their schedule. This period is solely dedicated to data analysis and the whole grade is given the opportunity to meet and discuss trends they see across the grade as well as share best practices. PS 39 also has a school wide data team which has a representative from each grade. This team looks at the school data overall and breaks it down into grades and then subgroups which the ELLs are a part of. Each grade has an ENL teacher that meets on a monthly basis to explore new strategies that include technology and lends students the opportunity to critical thinking ELL data is focused on during the meetings to discover the areas needed for improvement in reading, writing and math. When a pattern is recognized it is brought to the attention of the teachers and along with the support of our ENL teachers, adjustments are made to lessons during the school day as well as in our academic after school programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Based on CR Part 154.2, ELLs will receive their minutes through the methods of either stand-alone (pull out), integrated (push-in) or a combination of both, dependent upon their proficiency levels. Students who received a score at the Entering (EN) and level will receive 360 minutes, 180 of those minutes will be in a stand-alone setting in the area of ELA and the remaining 180 minutes will be in an integrated setting. Emerging level students will receive 360 minutes as well. However, they will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL, 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL and the remaining 90 minutes will be either be through stand-alone or integrated ENL. Transitioning and expanding level students will be grouped together by grade. They will receive 180 minutes of ENL/ELA or other content area throughout the week. The students at the Commanding (Proficient) level will be included in the integrated ENL model to receive their mandated 90 minutes of instruction. Due to student numbers and ELLs with IEPs, it wasn't possible for all of our ELLs to be placed in one class per grade. Per grade, there are certain classes that have a majority of our ELLs in one general education class and our special education ELLs with were placed in classroom settings according to their IEPs. Our classroom teachers have planned to teach a certain subject area at the same time during the school day. Therefore, if ELLs are pulled into another classroom it is a seamless transition because it is the same subject their own class is doing. b. TBE program. If applicable. NOT APPLICABLE c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 59  NOT APPLICABLE 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The allotted instruction time mandated by NYS per Part 154.2 has changed for ELLs based on the new proficiency levels. All levels will receive instruction using the Integrated ENL method and Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning levels will include the stand alone ENL method for a certain amount of minutes per week. ELLs who are at the Entering level will receive 360 minutes of instruction per week, where 180 minutes is in a stand alone model and the remaining 180 minutes is taught using the integrated ENL model. Emerging level ELLs will also receive 360 minutes of instruction. For Emerging students, 90 minutes will be in the stand alone model, 180 minutes will be in an integrated model and the remaining 90 minutes will be completed in either one of the models based on the discretion of the ENL and administration. Expanding level students will receive 180 minutes and Commanding level students will receive 90 of strictly Integrated ENL. ELLs in Grades 1-5 have been scheduled to be together in their respective grade classrooms. If they were not previously scheduled to be all in one classroom (transfers, late admits, etc.) the certified ENL teacher will pick up that specific ELL during the Integrated ENL, and bring them to the classroom where the other ELLs are for instruction. For all students who score Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding, 180 minutes will be provided using the integrated ENL method in the general education classroom. For Entering and Emerging, the remaining minutes will be provided using the stand alone method. The students at the Commanding level will receive 90 minutes of Integrated instruction in their general education classroom. Our ENL teacher and the rest of the teaching staff, plan a program that fulfills the state regulations of mandated minutes for our ELLs. We are in compliance, under CR Part 154.2, with servicing our ELLs as detailed above. Native Language support is delivered in our ENL model 25% of the time. We are able to provide our students with a bilingual library and glossaries to help them in their academics. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content areas are delivered in and English-only setting by our ENL teacher. Due to changes in mandates, 75% of the instruction by the ENL teacher will now be completed using the integrated English as a New Language approach. The teacher will team teach with a general education classroom teacher and also work alongside the ELLs in a small group setting during group work. Our school uses the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project program in grades K-5. TCRWP reading instruction relies on research that shows that children need to read a lot of texts, with high comprehension, in order to move up levels of text complexity. TCRWP reading workshops are structured to allow for students to read (eyes on print) every day for 35-45 minutes in the reading workshop. There is research evidence which suggests that volume of reading is linked to attaining higher-order literacy proficiency. The reading curriculum offers students a balance of reading literature and informational texts throughout the year. Each grade's curriculum includes units which are entirely devoted to supporting students in reading to learn through non-fiction reading about topics of high interest to them as well as topics related to content curriculum. For our lower level ELLs, who some are at a pre-reading level, phonics development is an important part of instruction. If they are not familiar with sound/letter relationships, our ELLs will not progress in learning how to read. Also, our ELLs need to be exposed to academic language through multiple entry points in the lesson. The ENL teacher will be able to plan with the classroom teacher and add modifications to the lesson based on the levels of the ELLs and the content being taught. With all of our ELLs, the teacher uses realia from home as well as via the Internet and the Promethian board. The ENL teachers follow the curriculum of Teacher's College for reading. The teacher uses ENL strategies, such as modeling, scaffolding and peer collaboration during her instructional time. With the use of technology, the teacher is able to activate prior knowledge from students ranging in proficiency level. This lays the groundwork for her to scaffold information for the students to learn at their own pace. However, it all starts the same way with the teacher presenting the information in a way that makes students excited to learn. Also, this year we are beginning to introduce virtual reality into our classrooms. This 2018-19 CEP 60  method of presentation will provide our students the experiences of field trips to places like the ocean floor or to the top of a volcano without having to leave their classroom. This will be a wonderful opportunity for our ELLs because it will be a time where they will develop their academic as well as social language as they partner up with a classmate to explore. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As a school we have several language paraprofessionals that assist in this process. Our language paras provide support in ensuring that our ELLs are evaluated throughout the year in their home language throughout various subject areas. They provide assistance to the teacher when translations need to be done either verbally or in writing. Evaluations are done quarterly. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our school has the two out of the three subgroups of ELLs: Newcomers (0-3 years) and ELLs receiving services (4-6 years). Currently, we have no SIFE students. If and when we get a SIFE student, we will identify him/her by examining the attendance records. For example, if a student started his/her education in the NYC Public Schools, but then left to return to his/her native country and subsequently re-entered the system, the Parent Coordinator or Pupil Accounting Secretary will ask the parent or guardian for evidence of school records outside the system to determine if there was an interruption in formal education. Along with receiving the mandated minutes, SIFE students will also be provided with access to all of our after school programs as well as support personnel to increase their knowledge of basic English in both a social as well as academic level. The ENL teacher will also try to find any Transitional Bilingual programs that are offered in the native language and provide that information to the parents. The subgroups currently in P.S. 39 have specific needs but the same goal in mind: To learn the English language in both academic and social atmospheres. Many of our newcomers have been here for less than one year are being exposed to English for the first time and are not familiar with the phonemic structure of the language. With these particular ELLs we need to help them form a strong phonics base which will be the stepping stone for them to read and comprehend academic context that they are faced with everyday. ELLs that are mandated to take state exams will be given all necessary accommodations to be as successful as they can be on the tests. As stated previously, there are many programs available during and after school that our ELLs take part in. Their scores on the interim assessments will also be analyzed and the areas they are having difficulty will be targeted by the teachers and goals will be put in place. ELLS in the 4-6 year subgroup, will continue to be monitored in their progress through classroom observations, interim assessment results and the state test results. If our program ever has long-term ELLs that have completed 6 years, they will be closely monitored to determine whether or not they need something more than just English services to help them succeed in school. Some of our ELLs also receive AIS services where they have instruction in guided reading, individual targeted lesson plans based on teacher recommendation through the Great Leaps literacy program. ELLs that have achieved proficiency on the NYSESLAT will receive 2 years of testing modifications for all NYS standardized tests. The classroom and ENL teachers will collaborate on the needs of that ELL and determine how much support is necessary for that child to continue academic success in the general education classroom. In P.S. 39, we have a staff that is very aware of our ELLs needs and we provide them with every resource available. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In our school we use the TCRWP and Math In Focus for Mathematics for our core programs. These programs are used as grade level and content area resources. These programs come with instructional strategies to target the needs of our ELL students. Each instructional period has multiple opportunities for listening, speaking, reading and writing. 2018-19 CEP 61  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The curricular provides the resources to support our ELL through providing multiple strategies through using visual aids, sentence starters and prompts, making connections to real life experiences and providing experiences through having hands on opportunities. Our schools instructional model allows students for multiple opportunities of engaging in group and partner discussions, small group instruction to provide direct instruction based on need and opportunities of independent and partner practices based on the ELLs point of entry. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Through inquiry work, needs of our ELLs are addressed in ELA, math and other content areas. With the new regulations of mandated minutes for ELLs, a portion of their instruction will be conducted using the Integrated ENL/Content area approach. The ENL teachers will push into the general education classrooms daily throughout all grades. In grade 2, the teacher will push into the 2nd grade for a period of Social Studies to assist with the ELLs with content area instruction Throughout the year, a successful intervention program for our ELLs in content area related subjects has been our ELL After School Academy that we offer. Our after school academy is held 3 days per week for 3 hours per day. We have chosen to target our ELLs in grades K-2 and 3-5. Based on the 2017 NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, in grades K-2 we have a total of 11 Entering, 8 Emerging, 11 Transitioning and 13 Expanding. Based on the 2017 NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, in grades 3-5 we have a total of 3 Entering, 6 Emerging, 6 Transitioning and 12 Expanding. In our after school program we will focus on both writing and reading. This year the program will provide differentiated instruction in Literacy and Math, guided reading and guided math instruction and explicit vocabulary instruction and guided practice. This will be provided in a small group setting as well as through the implementation of station teaching. It has been proven time and time again that ELLs benefit from extra small group instruction and our academy has provided that type of setting for our ELLs. Through inquiry work, needs of our ELLs are addressed in ELA, math and other content areas. Another reading program we use as an intervention is Great Leaps. This program focuses on accelerating reading and reading fluency of the student. Students are placed in the program and receive 1-on-1 instruction from a trained staff member in the building everyday. Finally, Orton-Gillingham is another program that is implemented throughout the day with our ELLs. This program works on the connection between sounds and letters. This approach supports our ELLs in gaining confidence in their reading. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year our Y After School Program has enrollment for 125 students at PS 39 and the students either have to pay for the program or are chosen by a lottery system to participate. Children that do have to pay are given the opportunity to receive a scholarship for partial payment of tuition. The Y After School Program will give our ELLs another opportunity to attend a program that will aid in their academic success. Along with the after school programs, our ELLs are also provided with numerous supplemental services depending upon their need. In our school we also have after school small group instruction, Great Leaps reading fluency program, Orton-Gillingham, Soar to Success, READ program, At-RISK SETTS, SETTS, Sonday, counseling and speech services. Through a grant this year we were also able to hire another Physical Education teacher which will allow our students to attend PE more frequently than it has in the past. Our school offers a basketball team for boys and girls, a fitness club and also a running club for all students. We also have music for 5 full days so we now are able to expose every single student in our school with music. Through a grant, our school is able to fund the program of Studio in the School. This program has a professional artist come in to our school and teach all of our students different types of art. As another activity, our school has created a drama class for students in grades K-3 and they will all take part in the class one time per week. Students in grades 4-5 have drama club one time per week. Also through a Disney grant our school received, all students were able to audition for roles in the play. The arts have been a small part in our school in the past but we understand the importance they serve in education. By exposing students on all grade levels to music and art our school is allowing opening up another avenue of learning for our students. Our ELLs especially can benefit from music and art because it gives them a platform to share and work with others in a setting other than a traditional classroom. We also have a library teacher 3 days per week who sees all grades throughout the school day. She exposes our ELLs to how a library works and also teaches them about holidays in our country. In the morning, Mrs. Wright also has a morning reporter group which is opened to all students. These children "run the show" when it comes to the morning announcements and it ranges from the weather 2018-19 CEP 62  to the menu for lunch. We have also implemented Leader In Me (LIM) and Emotional Intelligence (EI) which are programs that deal with character building and inner feelings respectively. Through LIM we have become a Lighthouse school and the culture of LIM runs through our school from kindergarten to every staff member. All of our students partake in these programs and we have noticed that when children are given the tools to express how they feel verbally, they are able to perform better in the classroom. Our ELLs have benefited from these programs because even though they deal with academics, all students, no matter what language they speak, need to understand their feelings and how to become a productive citizen in our school community. These programs have also enriched our ELLs’ vocabulary in both social and academic settings because they afford them the chance to speak about something they are experts in which is themselves. Once they begin to feel comfortable speaking in the open they are then able to feel more confident in their classroom discussions. Going along with LIM and EI, this year we added a Substance Abuse Prevention Intervention Specialist (SAPIS) as part of our full-time staff. She will use a curriculum based program that mainly focuses on life skills, empathy and building community within the school. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NOT APPLICABLE 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are afforded equal access to all of our school programs. They are provided with letters to bring home to their guardians whenever there is a program they can participate in through our school. The after school and supplemental services that are offered to our ELLs are: ELL After School Academy, ELA/Math Test Prep Academy, 4 th &5 th Grade Clubs, After School clubs,Y Afterschool Program, music, guidance, speech, drama, SETTS, Orton Gillingham, READ program and Great Leaps Literacy Program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In the ENL program at P.S. 39 there are a wide variety of materials used throughout the year. All classrooms are provided with leveled libraries. Along with the leveled library, there is also a bilingual library available in our school library which consists of over 190 books in six different languages (Spanish, Russian, Urdu, Chinese, Arabic and Albanian). The teacher reinforces skills learned in the classroom through the stories and also through the use of ENL methodologies. Every classroom is outfitted with a Promethian board which allows the teacher to produce interactive lessons for their class. Teachers are able to create assessments on the computer and the students input their answers by a touch of a button. After they complete the task, teachers are able to access their results instantly to measure which skills students have mastered or still need to work on. Each class is also equipped with iPads and certain classes just were given Chromebooks and Macbook Airs to assist the ELL students. Students are also assessed formally through written assessments as well as informally through teacher observation. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our English as a New Language program, the home language is supported for our ELLs. As mentioned before we have a bilingual lending library, as well as our main school library, which gives students access to books in their language to share with their parents. We also have bilingual glossaries for our students which they are able to use during their school day. On staff we have 8 different languages that are spoken other than English. They are: Albanian (2 Teachers and Para), Arabic (Para), Greek (Teacher), Polish (Teacher), Russian (Para), Spanish (Para), Yugoslavian (Para), Mandarin (2 Paras). Everyone at our school is willing and able to aid in translations between students, teachers and caregivers. They are a very valuable asset to our staff. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our literacy program is grade specific and all of our ELLs are age appropriate for their grade. Therefore, all the material and resources provided to the teacher for the student is on their grade and age level. Based on CR Part 154.2, ELLs will receive their minutes through the methods of either stand-alone (pull out), integrated (push-in) or a combination of both, dependent upon their proficiency levels. Students who received a score at the Entering (EN) level will receive 360 minutes, 180 of those minutes will be in a stand-alone setting in the area of ELA and the remaining 180 minutes will be in an integrated setting. Emerging level students will receive 360 minutes as well. However, they will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL, 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL and the remaining 90 minutes 2018-19 CEP 63  will be either be through stand-alone or integrated ENL. Transitioning and expanding level students will be grouped together by grade. They will receive 180 minutes of ENL/ELA or other content area throughout the week. The students at the Commanding (Proficient) level will be included in the integrated ENL model to receive their mandated 90 minutes of instruction. Due to numbers and ELLs with IEPs, it wasn't possible for all of our ELLs to be placed in once class per grade. There are certain classes that have a majority of our ELLs in one general education class and special education ELLs with were placed in classroom settings according to their IEPs. Our classroom teachers have planned to all teach a certain subject area at the same time during the school day. Therefore, if ELLs are pulled into another classroom it is a seamless transition because it is the same subject their own class is doing. ENL strategies have been infused into content instruction in all of our classrooms. Since P.S. 39 has a wide variety of levels, teachers have been made aware of the different characteristics of each language proficiency level. During the Entering level, teachers provide opportunities for ELLs to listen and demonstrate responses physically; encouraging verbal responses; provide an abundance of comprehensible input; develop listening and speaking skills; and use activities to help provide pre-writing skills such as matching words with pictures. At the Transitioning level teachers: provide more opportunities for students to respond verbally; continue to support reading comprehension with visual/concrete objects; activate background knowledge; and writing tasks ranging from labeling items to writing sentences. At the Expanding and Commanding level teachers: scaffold lessons; focus on vocabulary building; and encourage more complex sentence structures. All the above strategies can be used across the board for all content areas and are age and grade level appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? NOT APPLICABLE 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newcomers attending a new school and not speaking the language are embraced and placed in a positive learning environment to help them with the adjustment. Parents are always greeted by someone upon entering and if their language is one other than English we can provide translation services to help the parent understand the school process. The newcomer students are assessed by the NYSITELL or by past test results from the NYSESLAT if applicable and placed in level appropriate classes. ELLs at the Entering level also are provided with access to Imagine Learning and are automatically immersed in the English language. We have a diverse culture in P.S. 39. This diversity allows teachers, at times, to assign a language buddy in class that speaks the same language as our ELL and they are in charge of helping them become acclimated with classroom and school routines. Currently, we are working on providing a language club in our after school program which will be offered to all of our students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time, we do not have any other languages offered for our ELL students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NOT APPLICABLE AT THIS TIME Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 64  Professional development is provided throughout the year for all of our common branch teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselor, special education teacher, psychologist, OT/PT, speech therapists, secretaries, parent coordinators in the different ENL methodologies that can be used in the classroom along with general English Language Learner information (NYSESLAT, student levels, LAP training). Topics that are applicable for use in the classroom to be covered per discussions with teachers should include: using Core Curriculum Mathematics for ELL students; ENL in Content Areas; How to plan lessons which include ELLs; Writer’s Workshop for ELLs; Reader's workshops for ELLs; the new Targets Of Measurement (ToMs) for our ELLs. These ENL workshops, along with the Q-Tel Conferences, are offered throughout New York City and will be posted for teachers to attend during the school year. Teachers of ELLs as well as the ENL teacher participate in numerous professional developments throughout the year. The ENL teacher attends a monthly ENL meeting which other ENL teachers participate in to collaborate about best practices used in their classroom. She also participates in workshops that deal with supporting the ELL in the classroom with Common Core writing and reading. There was also training on the changes of the NYSESLAT and examples about what is expected from our ELLs for the new testing structure. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We plan to support staff through ensuring that our ELLs have academic vocabulary before transitioning from Elementary to Middle School. Staff will also talk to the students about the differences between Elementary and Middle School to assist students to become more acclimated to this process. ELL specific professional development will be provided quarterly in order for all teachers. PD activities are recorded through agendas and attendance. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school must individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting will include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a bilingual education program. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. This meeting can take place on the Tuesday during the allotted time for parent engagement. Parents will be notified by phone call regarding the meeting and their scheduled time. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Records for annual individual meetings with ELL parents as well as outreach to ensure pare needs are accommodated will be logged and placed in the ELL binder that contains all the information of the ELLs. The records will contain copies of letters sent, agendas, dates, names of parents seen, and also any phone calls made will be logged with date and discussion topic. Our parents are involved in the hands on workshops for our Math In Focus curriculum which provides vocabulary, language acquisition, critical thinking and engagement. Our parents also participate in our Writing Celebrations that occur at the end of each Writing Unit. This is when the student reads their published pieces to their parents and explain how they came up with the ideas about their writing assignments. Our school also has a leadership day to showcase our Leader in Me program. All parents are encouraged to come and take a tour of our school by our student tour guides and look in on our classrooms and how LIM in infused into our instruction. 2018-19 CEP 65  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tracey Wright, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 39 School DBN: 31R039 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R039 School Name: Francis J. Murphy Jr. School Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. As a school community we utilize the Home Language Identification Survey, ATS reports, student emergency cards in order to asses the language needs of ur school community. Through these multiple means we have over 19 languages in our school community. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 69 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Parents prefer spoken and written language in Spanish and English. Curently in our school we have the following languages: Albanian, Aarabic, Cantonese, Chinese dialect-other, Mandarin, French, Gujarati, Hungarian, Lithuanian, Macedonian, Polish, Russian, Spanish, Turkish, Ukrainian and Urdu. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Every year as a school we distribute monthly class newsletters, monthly school newsletters, monthly events calendar, parent teacher conference announcements, school closing, after-school information, NY State testing dates, curriculum nights, teacher and school websites, principal letter to students. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 70  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent teacher conferences three times a year, curriculum nights twice a year, and parent engagement afternoons. Guidance and attendance teachers only contact students if there is a need that arises around academic , behavioral and emotional interventions. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) When parents enter the building there will be welcome posters that greet visitors, near the parent coordinator's office there will be the parents' bill of rights, the parent's guide to language access. By the security desk and main office there will be the language ID guides available for all visitors and parent. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? As a school we will ask for verbal and written feedback in regards to the quality and a availability of services. This will be done in the PTA meetings, parent engagement times, parent teacher conferences and during informal parent visits to the school. 2018-19 CEP 71 
