2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R041 School Name: P.S. 041 NEW DORP Principal: JENNIFER LOGAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Stephanie AVierno 353100010041 Pre-Kindergarten-Grade 5 School Number (DBN): 31R041 216 Clawson Street, Staten Island, New York 10306 7183516777 Phone Number: 7186678200 Fax: Jennifer Logan Jlogan7@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Jennifer Logan Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Mary-Alexis Cushing Marianna D'Aquino Gina Ocasio EnzaPistone N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: Anthony Lodico Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, New York ALodico@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7184205657 Phone Number: 7184205677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Staten Island FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Kevin Moran Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, New York KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 9177557339 Phone Number: 7183916109 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Jennifer Logan Mary-Alexis Cushing Marianna D'Aquino EnzaPistone Gina Ocasio Jacqueline Fileccia Jill Boyle Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jillian Porrino Jodi Personette George Rivera Wendy Terzo Brandy Lawless Member/ Teacher Member/Custodian Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? . Our mission statement is as follows: Mission Statement: P.S. 41R, The Stephanie A. Vierno School, is committed to educating each student enabling them to reach their fullest potential. We promote qualities such as integrity, collaboration, initiative and discipline in every classroom. Using research based teaching strategies and effective instructional practices we deliver a cutting edge 2018-19 CEP 9  curriculum in every classroom. We empower our students to become critical readers, analytical thinkers, problem solvers, multi-lingual citizens, comprehensive writers, and eventually successful college graduates. We strive to produce lifelong learners who are capable of meeting the challenges of a 21 st century globally economic world. Our measurable success is due to the true collaboration of the P.S. 41R stakeholders, instructional leaders, highly qualified teachers, dedicated parents, and determined students. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 41R, The Stephanie A. Vierno School, is an elementary school with 697 students from Pre-kindergarten through Grade 5. In addition to general education classrooms, P.S. 41R has three special education self- contained classrooms as well as a growing Spanish/English Dual Language program in Grades 1-5. The school population comprises 2% Multi-racial, 3% Black, 33% Hispanic, 47% White, and 14% Asian students. The student body includes 14.6% English language learners and 20.8% special education students. Boys account for 51.2% of the students enrolled and girls account for 48.7%. To support our staff and students in achieving our mission, P.S. 41R will continue to participate in the Learning Partners Program (LPP) through the Office of Inter-school Collaborative Learning (OICL) as an LPP partner school of a triad for a third year. This partnership promotes inter-school collaborative learning and leverages the rich reservoir of expertise that resides in the participating school communities in order to improve outcomes for all students with a focus area supporting language and English Language learners. The Learning Partners team will provide professional learning opportunities for a select group of teachers that will pilot the work and act as conduits to the rest of the school community. We will also continue our partnership with Teachers College (TC) Reading and Writing Project, Columbia University for the third year as staff and students alike unanimously welcomed and reaped benefits from the support and guidance this collaboration has afforded. This partnership will include 20 site based visits from Teachers College staff developers who will continue to delve into the work begun during the 2016-2017 with our staff and students. In addition, our staff members will be given the opportunity to attend 25 calendar days, offered exclusively to partner schools through the project, to hone their craft. The Teachers College Reading and Writing curriculum affords students opportunities to develop their skills as readers and writers along a developmental standard-based continuum that includes both peer and self reflection, allows students to excel at their own pace, and includes supports so that students can reach their fullest potential. Teachers will receive resources to enhance instruction, provide standard-based next steps and attend to individual learners. In alignment with New York City's Equity and Excellence initiative, PS 41R will be participating in the Algebra for All initiative striving for academic excellence. The goals of the initiative are to have all students receive the academic supports in elementary and middle school to ensure greater algebra readiness. This will allow students to complete algebra no later than ninth grade , enabling students to reach more advanced courses in high school and better prepare them for college and careers as per the DOE initiative. To that end PS 41R will be departmentalizing subjects in Grade 5 in 2018-2019 to ensure that we are best supporting students toward the goal of Algebra for All. Our math teachers will participate in intense professional development sessions throughout the summer and receive support throughout the school year in the form of professional learning days. These efforts will contribute to ensuring that delivery of instruction is executed by teachers with expanded expertise in math instruction and strategies. This work will build upon the professional learning that teachers engaged in with our partnership with National Training Network during the 2017-2018 school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  Instructional Focus :  If we work together to analyze our broad range of learners’ performance and progress in relation to the standards, tailor instruction utilizing approaches and resources to integrate the specific learning needs of all students, and engage students in actionable feedback conversations, Then their independent work will reflect ownership and active involvement over their next steps leading to increased performance. In an effort to ensure coherence and norm expectations the school has developed an assessment package that supports teachers in looking closely at student progress in order to inform instruction. Assessments are created and/or selected collaboratively during teacher team meetings, and administered across grade levels and content areas. Teachers use rubrics to assess the rigor in student work and alignment to standards. During English Language Arts (ELA) and Mathematics, teachers use data from pre-assessments and on-going assessments to work with students to create individual goals as well as inform instruction aligned to key skills identified in the instructional units. Teachers use a variety of checks for understanding such as turn and talk, standards based checklists, exemplar pieces for students to align their work to, and exit slips to target and support areas of concern in students’ academic skills. All rubrics and checklists are aligned across classrooms and grades to assess student understanding in Kindergarten-Grade 5 and work toward common goals. A pedagogical shift toward increased effective practices that focus on strengthening reading and writing instruction to foster student independence is a team initiative across the school and is aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching. There is a school-wide focus on student engagement and building student independence and reflection through questions and conversations aligned to the success criteria of each unit of study. As we believe parents are partners, P.S. 41R regularly communicates with families in their preferred languages and offers multiple opportunities for them to learn about their child's academic progress as well as keep informed about what their children are learning. Examples include: The Parent Handbook, Grading/Promotion Policy, Pupil Path, School Messenger, Remind101, Parent celebrations and workshops, student led conferences, and emails. Parents can also take part in “Chat with the Principal,” where the Principal communicates with parents in an open forum to discuss current school events, and parent concerns. Teachers use the parent-teacher conferences in September to share the school-wide grading policy and what students will be learning at each grade for the current school year. Open school night in May bridges the learning to the future year. During these conferences, students reflect on their work and share their plans and goals through an open conversation about their work and/or portfolios. The school calendar provides monthly events for parents and families to engage in as both celebrations and learning opportunities. A series of parent workshops are offered to support their understanding of the school’s expectations and students’ academic growth. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body includes 14.6% English language learners and 20.8% special education students. P.S. 41R has experienced an increase in English Language Learners, with students entering beyond the Kindergarten level such as some students entering the NYC public school system in Grades 3-5 for the first time. Our most recent data from the 2017-2018 NYS ELA demonstrates 15% of ELLs performing at standard as compared to 10% from the 2016-2017 school year. There was growth noted in students moving closer to proficiency from the 2016-2017 school year as compared to the 2017-2018 school year: Level 1: 47%; Level 2: 43%; Level 3: 7%; Level 4: 3% (2016-2017) Level 1: 23%; Level 2: 63%; Level 3: 15%; Level 4: 0%. NYS Math Data from the 2017-2018 school year demonstrates growth for Students receiving English Language services, as 27% are meeting standard as compared to 22% from the previous year. Students moving closer to proficiency is evidenced as follows: Level 1: 28%; Level 2: 50%; Level 3: 14%, Level 4: 8% (2016-2017) Level 1: 23%; Level 2: 50%; Level 3: 27%; Level 4: 0%. NYSESLAT data from the 2017-2018 school year demonstrates 80% of students at the Expanding and Commanding levels as compared to 66.6% from the year prior. Growth was also noted in the performance of our Students with Disabilities from the 2016-2017 to the 2017-2018 school year with 18% of students meeting standard as compared to 11% from the previous year. The data 2018-19 CEP 11  demonstrates students moving closer to proficiency: Level 1: 47%; Level 2: 42%; Level 3: 8%; Level 4: 3% (2016-2017) Level 1: 42%; Level 2: 40%; Level 3: 16%; Level 4: 1%. As per the 2017-2018 NYS Math Assessment, 19% of Students with Disabilities were meeting standard as compared to 12% from the previous year. Movement toward standards is indicated as follows: Level 1: 57%; Level 2: 31%; Level 3: 11%; Level 4: 2% (2016-2017) Level 1: 54%; Level 2: 27%; Level 3: 15%; Level 4: 4%. In response to our growing needs of language acquisition and performance data, we will continue to offer two certified ENL teachers to provide more targeted integrated and stand alone instruction. The Dual Language Spanish Program will service students in Grades 1-5 along with the ENL Program in 2018-2019. We will continue to support our students receiving English Language services through the work of our LPP Team and are beginning our SE Access Team as an outgrowth of our work in the SIT and LPP. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Moving into the 2018-2019 school year we will build on the goals that we instituted over the past two school years, with an emphasis on tailoring supports for individual learners through a focus on deepening students' foundational skills in the primary grades and increased opportunities for teachers to engage in collaborative practices promoting equity and excellence for all learners. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, we have remained strong in the area of Rigorous Instruction (4.76) and Strong Family and Community Ties (4.04) and saw an increase in Collaborative Teachers: (4.0) 2017-2018; (3.65) 2016-2017, Effective School Leadership (3.38) 2017-2018; (3.14) 2016-2017 , and Trust (3.69) 2017-2018; (3.28) 2016-2017 . There is a need for continued work on creating a supportive environment built on trust and collaboration. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R041 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 685 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 28 28 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 32 28 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 58.5% % Reduced Lunch 15.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 30.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 52.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 59.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 78 77 93.8% 8.9% 21.8% 2.3% 12.7% 2.3% 4 0% 8.1 55.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of Study were adopted in the 2015-2016 school year. This standards-based curricula has been implemented across all Kindergarten-Grade 5 classrooms, with the instructional day consisting of Read Aloud, Readers Workshop, Writers Workshop, Shared Reading, and Word Study. The Reading and Writing Units of Study often work in tandem, supported by the Read Aloud and Shared Reading, providing cohesion of learning. Since the inception of this work, we have seen growth in students' reading comprehension as evidenced by cycles of observations and formative and summative assessments. The NYS English Language Arts Assessments across the past four years have demonstrated and increase in students performing at Levels 3 and 4: 2014-2015: 38.24%; 2015-2016: 45.63%; 2016-2017: 53.52%; 2017-2018: 60%. The number of students identified as "Not Met" as per the June 2018 Met/Not Met results has decreased from 11.7% Not Met in 2016-2017 to 5.2% Not Met in 2017-2018. While we have seen an increase in students' reading comprehension, decoding text has been noted as an area of deficiency as evidenced in the running record data and presented at the RTI/PPT Meetings for General Education students and students receiving Special Education and/or English as a New Language services. The majority of RTI supports recommended at the Tier I, II, and III levels has focused primarily on letter/sound, sight word recognition, and decoding. Students that were instructed at the Tier II and III levels received phonics' instruction via SPIRE, a research-based program provided by the special education teachers in a push-in or pull-out structure. In addition, Fundations has been utilized whole class in Kindergarten and Grade 1, however the alignment to the students' independent reading and writing has not fully transferred. Our goal is to provide a strong literacy foundation for all students beginning at the Kindergarten level. Moreover, we seek to service students in the least restrictive environment and ensure that all learning is cohesive and aligned. The September 2017 and June 2018 reading data as found in TCRWP Assessment Pro demonstrates the following:         September 2017 Kindergarten students performing at Levels Pre-Emergent-Level B: 95.35% September 2017 Kindergarten students performing at Level C+: 4.65% June 2018 Kindergarten Students performing at Levels Pre-Emergent-Level B: 40.22% (Level 1) June 2018 Kindergarten students performing at Levels C-J: 59.78% (Levels 2-4) September 2017 Grade 1 students performing at Levels B and below: 30.27% (Level 1) September 2017 Grade 1 students performing at Level C+: 69.73% (Levels 2-4) June 2018 Grade 1 students performing at Levels B-F: 17.54% (Level 1) June 2018 Grade 1 students performing at Levels G+: 82.46% (Levels 2-4) At Levels B and below, students typically rely on meaning to read the text, drawing upon the book introduction, pictures, predictable pattern, and knowledge of basic sight words to read. Moving into Levels C-I, students are required to apply their knowledge of letters and sounds to decode unfamiliar words in addition to a need to recognize an increased amount of sight words. Students are also expected to read with phrasing and intonation beginning at 2018-19 CEP 14  Level D. Without this foundation, students face challenges when encountering unfamiliar words in print and demonstrate difficulty generating words in their writing. The Teachers College Phonics Program is designed to complement the Reading and Writing Units of Study so that the content, pacing, and transfer sets students up for success as independent readers and writers. Integrating phonemic awareness and phonics into the Word Study, aligned to the literacy instructional components, is intended to support students as they develop the three cueing systems alongside the rich standards-based Reading and Writing Units of Study. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Kindergarten-Grade 2 teachers will work together to deepen curricula and instructional practices in foundational reading and writing skills, norm standards-based expectations, analyze data, and enhance alignment to improve student learning resulting in a 5% increase in students in Grades K-2 performing at Levels 3 and 4 in Reading and Writing as evidenced by an analysis of benchmark Running Records and Unit Writing Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Ongoing analysis of student data at the school, grade, sub-group and teacher level. Student data will consist of Writing pre and post assessments, Teachers College Reading benchmark levels, and conference notes. Specific data will be disaggregated by subgroup. All K-2 teachers will receive the new Teachers College Phonics Curriculum aligned to the Reading and Writing Units of Study. Teachers will work together in teams to engage in inquiry cycles of learning. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, students, Benchmark windows Principal Four-five week pre and post assessment results (8x per year) Assistant Principal Teacher Teams (K-2) TC Staff Developers Speech Teachers Conference notes reviewed (2x per year) Reading Summer Institute-8/6-8/10 Phonics Summer Institute 8/20-8/22 TC Conference Day Grade K & 1 Teachers: September 25 Teachers and students Principal Teachers in Kindergarten-Grade 2 will engage in professional development cycles with Teachers College Staff Developers and 2018-19 CEP 16 Administration with an emphasis on developing foundational skills in phonemic awareness and phonics with the goal of transference to students' independent reading and writing. September 17, 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal Teacher Teams (K-2) Teachers and students Learning Cycles: Speech Teachers Speech teachers will be assigned to groups of students in classrooms to increase collaboration and integration of supports within the academic environment. Cycle 1: 9/18, 10/2, 10/16 Cycle 2: 11/19, 11/26, 12/2 Cycle 3: 2/14, 2/27 Student data will be tracked and distributed to parents/guardians. Teachers and students Benchmark Assessment Periods Principal Assistant Principal Teacher Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 41 will support our families in understanding our efforts towards providing rigorous instruction to all students aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Progress Reports on students’ independent reading levels and strategies and suggestions to support them will be sent home by classroom teachers in October, January, March and June. In addition to our regularly scheduled Parent Teacher Conferences held in November and March, parents will be invited to a Curriculum Conference on September 17, 2018 where they will come to understand the expectations for the school year in all subject areas. Their child’s specific writing samples from the year prior will be shared along with student written goals for the current year based on standard criteria from relevant Rubrics and checklists. Finally, in May 2019, parents will be invited back to their child’s current classroom to see their progress and learn how to support their child for the upcoming year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 17  -Teachers College Reading and Writing Project School -Teachers College August Phonics Institute -Teachers College Phonics Curriculum and Resources -Substitute coverage for professional development sessions/conference days -Student independent reading texts Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Kindergarten-Grade 2 students will demonstrate a 3% gain in independent reading and writing performance as evidenced by January Benchmark Running Record Assessments and Writing Unit Assessments as compared to grade level data from the 2017-2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instruments of measure that will be used to assess progress are: -TC Assessment Pro Data (Letter/Sound, Sight Words, Running Records) -Writing Tracking Sheets (Writing Pre and Post Unit Assessment aligned to Standards-based rubrics) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? P.S. 41R has been selected to participate in the Learners Partners Program for the past three years. This opportunity has allowed teachers and administrators to engage in cycles of learning with an emphasis of improving student achievement for students receiving English as a New Language Services within and across schools. Through this learning, we have seen growth in vocabulary acquisition and student discussion as evidenced through informal data sources including an analysis of transcribed student group conversations and the application of strategies to problem solve the meaning of unknown words and phrases. Moreover, based upon analysis of data derived from RTI/PPT Meetings, SESIS, formal and informal assessments, we have not seen the same level of growth for our students receiving special education services as that of their peers. The June 2018 independent reading level data found in TCRWP Assessment Pro demonstrates the following:    School-wide, 62.52% of students are meeting or exceeding standards (Levels 3 & 4). Students receiving ENL services (K-5): Level 1: 41.9%; Level 2: 24.7%; Level 3: 17.14%; Level 4: 16.19%; (Levels 3 & 4: 33.3%) Students receiving SE services (K-5): Level 1: 44.14%; Level 2: 30.34%; Level 3: 11.72%; Level 4: 13.79% (Levels 3 & 4: 25.51%) Our most recent data from the 2017-2018 NYS ELA demonstrates 15% of ELLs performing at standard as compared to 10% from the 2016-2017 school year. There was growth noted in students moving closer to proficiency from the 2016-2017 school year as compared to the 2017-2018 school year: Level 1: 47%; Level 2: 43%; Level 3: 7%; Level 4: 3% (2016-2017) Level 1: 23%; Level 2: 63%; Level 3: 15%; Level 4: 0%. NYS Math Data from the 2017-2018 school year demonstrates growth for ELLs, as 27% are meeting standard as compared to 22% from the previous year. Students moving closer to proficiency is evidenced as follows: Level 1: 28%; Level 2: 50%; Level 3: 14%, Level 4: 8% (2016-2017) Level 1: 23%; Level 2: 50%; Level 3: 27%; Level 4: 0%. NYSESLAT data from the 2017-2018 school year demonstrates 80% of students at the Expanding and Commanding levels as compared to 66.6% from the year prior. Growth was also noted in the performance of our Students with Disabilities from the 2016-2017 to the 2017-2018 school year with 18% of students meeting standard as compared to 11% from the previous year. The data demonstrates students moving closer to proficiency: Level 1: 47%; Level 2: 42%; Level 3: 8%; Level 4: 3% (2016-2017) Level 1: 42%; Level 2: 40%; Level 3: 16%; Level 4: 1%. As per the 2017-2018 NYS Math Assessment, 19% of Students with Disabilities were meeting standard as compared to 12% from the previous year. Movement toward standards is indicated as follows: Level 1: 57%; Level 2: 31%; Level 3: 11%; Level 4: 2% (2016-2017) Level 1: 54%; Level 2: 27%; Level 3: 15%; Level 4: 4%. Attention to both subgroups is critical in improving student achievement. As such, P.S. 41R applied and was accepted for a third year into the Learning Partner Program. The current LPP school team will continue to deepen our study of ENL supports focused on cultural responsiveness while also acting as a model for new specialty teams. Our work this year will be guided by our P.S. 41R Vision for Racial Equity: 2018-19 CEP 19  "The literature binds all members of the P.S. 41 community; it serves as windows and mirrors, to see ourselves and others. It is complex, relevant, multi-culturally diverse, and allows for multiple perspectives. It is embedded in practice with teachers promoting a sense of belonging, community, and respect for one another through thoughtful conversation steeped in texts. Students engage through reading, listening, and sharing their thoughts, values, and experiences in a safe and supportive environment." The wealth of knowledge gleaned around team structures, protocols, and cycles of learning will serve as a foundation for the newly developed Special Education Access Team. The goal of this team will be to increase access and independence for students with disabilities, moving toward less restrictive environments within the school community. This vertical team comprised of key stakeholders within the community will work in tandem with the School Implementation and Response to Intervention/Pupil Personnel Teams to analyze student data, identify trends within the community, and develop action plans within the inquiry cycles of learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will work together in specialty teams to deepen culturally responsive, social-emotional, and content-specific practices, analyze data, enhance school-wide alignment, and build capacity amongst the staff to increase equity and excellence for students, resulting in 5% of students receiving ENL and/or IEP services moving to less restrictive environments as evidenced through SESIS and NYSESLAT data. 2018-19 CEP 20 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). As an outgrowth of our professional learning gleaned from our partnership in the Learning Partners Program over the past two years, team offerings will be increased to deepen our work and focus on subgroups of the community. -LPP Teacher Team -Students Receiving ENL Services September 5, 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers -Families of students receiving ENL services Quad dates: Lead Facilitators Learning Partner Cultural Responsiveness Team: Through a professional study focused on student achievement and equity team members will engage in cycles of learning focused on improving achievement for our English Language Learners within the school community and through the support of our quad partner schools. The Family Cultural Responsiveness Team, led by a teacher leader from the Learning Partner Cultural Responsiveness Team, will engage and invite families into the learning community. This team will work alongside our Title III After School Program, allowing family members time to engage in learning. 9/26, 10/30, 11/27, 12/17, 1/17, 2/12, 3/19, 4/16, 5/16 Weekly school meetings: Tuesdays period 7 September 2018-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 21  Utilizing the learning structures of the LPP Team, the development of the Special Education Access Team will serve to improve outcomes for our students with disabilities with the goal of increasing access and independence, and moving toward less restrictive environments within the school community. As part of the District 31 Algebra for All Initiative, Grade 5 has departmentalized, allowing teachers to focus and strengthen content knowledge in Mathematics. The Algebra for All Team will build upon their 12 day summer learning to deepen curriculum and instructional practices in Mathematics and engage members of the school community in learning. Fridays, period 7, weekly October 2018-June 2019 July 16, 2018-June 2019 Teachers Students receiving Special Education Services Grade 5 Math Teachers Grade 5 students 10/5, 10/16, 10/17, 11/26, 12/7, 12/11, 1/14, 1/30, 3/15, 3/29, 5/21 Administration Teachers Administration Teachers 2018-19 CEP 22  na na na na na na 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 41R will support our families in understanding our efforts towards providing access and supports for all students in the community with an emphasis on students receiving English as a New Language and Special Education services. Key stakeholders within the community will participate as team members, including the two full time ENL teachers, Dual Language teachers, Special Education teachers, School Assessment Team staff, and Administration. These staff members have frequent, direct contact with individual families. In addition to the weekly parent engagement Tuesdays and four parent teacher conferences, parents/guardians will have opportunities to understand our supportive environment through annual reviews, periodic progress monitoring, implementation of the new grading/promotion policy, Title III Parent After School Workshops, and participation on the Family Cultural Responsiveness Team. Moreover, school-wide decisions are contributed to during School Leadership Team (SLT) and Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings. PTA and SLT members serve as additional conduits of information to the greater school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Administration -Teachers -Paraprofessional Liaison -Learning Partner Program -Positive Behavior Tools (Voice Scale, Problem Scale, Whole Body Listening) -Sanford Harmony (Social-Emotional Learning) -Scheduling for Flexible Programming 2018-19 CEP 23  -Books of the Month: "Teamwork Isn't My Thing and I Don't Like to Share", "What if Everybody Did That?" "My Mouth is a Volcano", "Courage", "Making Friends Is An Art", "Bully B.E.A.N.S.", "Personal Space Camp", "Tease Monster", "The Worst Day of My Life Ever", "Thanks For the Feedback", and "Winners Don't Whine and Whiners Don't Win". -Algebra for All Resources -Absence coverage for professional learning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 3% of students receiving special education services will move to less restrictive environments as evidenced through SESIS and data tracking sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress is: -IEPs in SESIS -Conference notes -Tracking sheets -RTI/PPT meeting data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Beginning in the school year 2015-2016 the P.S. 41R learning community initiated a shift from isolated professional development sessions offered during the Professional Learning time on Mondays to Professional Learning Communities where teams of teachers planned collaboratively using a standard unit planning template; protocols; structures for meeting and distributive leadership practices designed by the cabinet. Student work was analyzed against criteria aligned to grade level standards and next steps were discussed collectively for each piece of student work while identifying trends in students performing at different levels. Teachers shared and promoted instructional strategies designed to support student progress. This work took on a whole school focus over a three year period from 2015-2016 to 2017-2018 focusing respectively on Writing, Reading and Mathematics. Developing a common language to support the work of inquiry teams as well as hone in on a very specific need of students receiving English Language services in the area of Reading was further developed as PS 41R engaged in the Learning Partners program through the Office of inter-school collaboration with partner schools from the District. This collaborative and focused work designed to deepen teacher's content knowledge and support small groups of students had an impact on student and teacher performance and progress as indicated in the data below: -According to results from the New York State ELA assessments Grades 3-5 there has been an upward trend of students meeting standards over the past few years and we expect the trend to continue. 38.24% of students were meeting standard in ELA in 2014-2015. The following year 2015-2016 we saw that rise 7.39% to 45.63% of students in grades 3-5 meeting standards followed by another increase of 7.89% in 2016-2017 with 53.52% of students meeting standards. Our 2017-2018 data demonstrates 60% of students meeting standards, a gain of 6.48%age points. These gains resulted in an increase of approximately 22 %age points in four years. -Additionally, we have seen an increase in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide results in the area of Collaborative Teachers. The framework element, Collaborative Teachers received a score of 3.65 in the 2016-2017 school year which was -0.34 below the district average and -0.12 below the city average. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide report the school rated 4.00 overall in the area of Collaborative teachers -.01 as compared to the district average and +.21 as compared to the city average. 2. According to the School Quality Guide results from 2016-2017, an average of 87% of teachers answered positively in subcategories related to Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction, the lowest categories being the ability to design appropriate instruction that is matched to students' need (for example, English language learners (ELL) proficiency and students with disabilities) as well as receiving support in how to incorporate students linguistic and cultural backgrounds in their practice. We have seen rise in these subcategories during the 2017-2018 school year to 91% as a result of increased attention directly related to the specific work of the LPP team however with our population growing in diversity and specific student needs we plan to continue to examine our practices thereby providing all students equitable opportunities for access to challenging and interesting material. Based on these gains and the work of the LPP team, we consider the specific and tailored inquiry work we engaged in a promising practice 2018-19 CEP 25  for our school and as a result will continue with tailored inquiry groups in an effort to garner change in instructional practices that result in academic and social emotional growth for groups of students. To this end, we are seeking to develop pockets of expertise in the 2018-2019 school year geared toward specific sub groups within the PS 41 community with the addition of acquired school-wide initiatives such as: acceptance into the Learning Partners Program for a third consecutive year, the Teacher Leadership Program, and the Algebra 4 All initiative which includes departmentalizing in grade 5 (ELA and Mathematics) for the first time at PS 41R. We will continue to partner with Teachers College Reading and Writing project under the guidance of a staff developer to hone our instructional practices in reading, writing and phonics instruction. Having made school wide gains in student and teacher growth and teacher practice and collaboration using the structures we have initiated thus far we feel compelled to go deeper as per our instructional focus to not only tailor instruction for small groups and individual students in each classroom but to engage with problems of practice relevant to our student population, current data; and teacher input and interest in areas of expertise. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will develop and engage in tailored inquiry cycles of learning informed by current data and unit specific needs designed to deepen curricula and instructional practices, norm standards-based expectations of new and existing programs, enhance school-wide alignment and build capacity amongst staff to improve student learning resulting in an increase in student understanding for all students including Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners as evidenced by growth from pre-post assessments; updated and aligned curricula plans and alignment of school created unit assessments. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  A team of six teacher leaders and one administrator will participate in the Teacher Leadership Program through the Office of Teacher Development. In these sessions, designed to challenge and support our future leaders, teachers will build their facilitative leadership capacity to drive our professional learning community and guide instructional improvements in the following areas: Instructional Leadership; Building a Professional Learning Community & Surfacing and Managing Controversy. Teacher Teams will engage in professional development cycles centered on designing engaging and coherent instruction aligned to standards and students' needs based on current school data. Teacher teams will utilize a variety of standard facilitation protocols and templates for effective goal setting, Teacher Teams, students September 2018-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 27 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Leaders October 2018-June, 2019 Eleven 3 hour sessions- approximately 1 x per month Assistant Principal 3-5 teacher leaders Principal  problem solving and reflective practices related to analyzing teacher and student work through a cycle of inquiry. Ongoing analysis of student data at the school, grade, sub-group and teacher level will take place. Student data will consist of New York State Assessment performance levels, pre and post school-based curricula assessments, benchmark assessments, inventories, anecdotal conference notes and data from chapter tracking sheets in Mathematics and ELA pertaining to the specific inquiry study and disaggregated by relevant subgroups. Teachers, Students Teachers will utilize iPads to enhance their data collection capabilities in order to analyze student performance through photos and videos as well as strengthen instructional practices. Teachers and Students Professional Development in the utilization of Software, methods and tools will be provided to accompany the PS 41 Weekly meetings following 4-8 week cycles Assistant Principal Teacher Teams K-5 Teacher Leaders September 2018-June 2019 Benchmark windows Four-five week pre and post assessment results ELA (8 x per year); 11-13 x per year Tracking sheets per Math chapter; -Two benchmark ELA and Math assessments in K-5 (Dec. and March); Qualitative data collection via video and observation; Student self-peer assessments (ongoing within cycles) Data collection within each inquiry cycle of learning Principal Assistant Principals Teacher Teams Instructional Leads TC Consultants Principal Assistant Principal Teacher Teams 2018-19 CEP 28  grading policies and for school-wide coherence utilizing a shared Google drive with G-suite capability. Student data will be tracked within each inquiry study and shared with staff members and administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 41R will support our families in understanding our efforts towards developing relationships where all members of the school community have opportunities to collaborate. As with the goal related to Rigorous Instruction many of the communication strategies designed to help parents assist their children are the same. Grade level teacher teams gather together to collaborate and contribute to the development of content and coordinate academic and cultural celebrations by grade level which are then shared with families. “Parents as Learning Partners”, an opportunity for parents to engage in learning with their children, was instituted during the 2016-2017 school year and will continue into 2018-2019. This is a structure where parents are invited to experience a Reading, Writing, or Math lesson alongside of their child 2-3 times per year. In addition to our regularly scheduled Parent Teacher Conferences held in November and March, parents will be invited to a Curriculum Conference on September 13, 2018 where they will come to understand the expectations for the school year in all subject areas. In May 2019, parents will be invited back to their child’s current classroom to view their successes and progress and learn how to support their children as they transition to the next grade. This event will be led by classroom teachers. School-wide decisions are contributed to during School Leadership Team (SLT) and Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings. PTA and SLT members serve as additional conduits of information to the greater school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Teachers College Staff developer -Substitute coverage for professional development sessions -Professional texts, Culturally responsive Teaching and the Brain, Hammond -Administration -Programming for LPP and SE Access Team to meet during the school day Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -By February 2019, All teacher teams will have engaged in 1-2 cycles of inquiry that will result in changes to curriculum maps and instructional strategies based on student engagement and/or improvement within inquiry cycles. Additionally all teams will have recorded the work of the inquiry in a shared and standard school document in our Shared Google Drive. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure that will be used to assess progress are: -School wide data to identify needs -Inquiry specific pre/post assessments -Team reflection sheets -Ongoing review of shared template for recording the inquiry work Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Measure of Leadership Practice in June 2018 highlighted Highly Effective leadership practice with areas of strength in Learning Environment and Goal Setting. Collaboration amongst the community to develop an inclusive culture that promotes equity, excellence, and empathy within rigorous and respectful learning tasks was celebrated. As per the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the categories below received the following positive feedback from teachers in the area of Effective School Leadership. Growth was noted in each category as compared to the 2016-2017 school year: Instructional Leadership: 2016-2017: 88%; 2017-2018: 91%   Program Coherence: 2016-2017: 84%; 2017-2018: 92%  Teacher Influence: 2016-2017: 58%; 2017-2018: 64% Professional conversations throughout the year and at the End of Year Conferences with individual teachers revealed the staff’s desire to continue to incorporate opportunities for horizontal teacher team planning sessions with the ability to focus in different areas supported by student data and curricula needs. Furthermore, as modeled through the Learning Partner Program (LPP) Team, teachers have expressed an interest in participating in vertical teams with in depth studies across the year. During Spring 2018 planning, teachers in Grades 3-5 worked with colleagues spanning across grade levels focused on specific areas such Writing, Reading, and Academic Behaviors as a means to build upon learning within the community and increase student accountability and ownership of their learning. In addition, an overwhelming majority of classroom and support teachers continue to cite the professional learning received through the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project as a support that positively impacted teaching and learning and wish to continue with this professional opportunity. It was communicated by the staff that the ability to meet and plan with colleagues and with the professional support of the Administration and Staff developers was invaluable to their practice. Also communicated during end of year conferences was that the feedback received post observation during the Danielson Observation Cycles was specific and actionable. Building on this momentum through frequent, individualized feedback to teachers, collaborative efforts amongst expanded teacher teams, staff developers and teachers; increased leadership opportunities, professional learning structures, and ongoing professional development in concert with the Collaborative Teachers' goal is relevant and essential to nurturing a collaborative community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 31  By June 2019, as a result of the school leaders' frequent, individualized feedback to teachers; collaborative efforts amongst expanded teacher teams, staff developers and teachers; increased leadership opportunities; professional learning structures; and ongoing professional development, there will be an increase of teacher leaders and shared decision making as evidenced through the school-wide professional learning plan, agendas, and formative, interim staff surveys. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Schedule Initial Planning Conferences and discuss professional goals aligned to the 2017-2018 feedback and 2018-2019 Instructional Focus and School-wide Goals. Teachers Develop observation cycles. Provide actionable and timely feedback, highlighting growth and next steps. Teachers Provide opportunities for collaboration and professional support through increased opportunities to participate on teacher teams, differentiated professional development, shared decision-making and inter-visitations based on Advance observation trends. Align teacher attendance at Teachers College Calendar days. Provide individualized support. Teacher and Paraprofessional Teams collectively contribute to the school-wide professional learning plan informed by data and curriculum trends. Increased opportunities for teacher leaders across teams. September 5, 2018-October 2, 2019 September 12, 2018-June 6, 2019 September 12, 2018-June 22, 2019 Administration Administration Teachers Administration TC Staff Developers Teachers Teachers Teachers Administration Paraprofessionals October 1, 2018-June 22, 2019 Teachers Paraprofessionals 2018-19 CEP 33 Teachers Paraprofessionals Analyze Advance data, teacher feedback, student data, professional development agendas, professional learning plan, to reflect and revise. Teachers Students September 12, 2018-June 22, 2019 Administration Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There are many opportunities for parents to take on leadership roles at P.S. 41R namely open elections to run for the School Leadership Team and Parent Teacher Association positions. Elections are held at the requisite time each year and the school and district bi-laws outlined for these teams are upheld. P.S. 41R institutes a “Class Parent” program where two parents represent the parent community for each class and act as a representative when communicating between school and parents. The Parent Coordinator oversees the class parent system. With our “Parents as Learning Partners” program, parents are invited and empowered to utilize the same standard based materials and strategies teachers are using during classroom instruction to support their children at home. These opportunities are provided by classroom teachers. Parent workshops designed to understand the expectations of Learning Standards in both the classroom and as appearing on NYS assessments are offered throughout the year (dates to be determined) by teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers College Staff Developers Learning Partner Program Substitute coverage for professional development and planning sessions Internal and external professional learning opportunities Schedules (Common planning time, teacher team opportunities) Professional reading Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 34  By February 2019, there will be a 1.5% growth in teacher responses as evidenced by a staff survey reflective of Effective School Leadership and Collaborative Teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure that will be used to assess progress are: -Teacher Surveys and Reflection Sheets -Professional Learning Plan -Teacher Team agendas -Framework for Great Schools Report 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-18 school year, there were many opportunities that welcomed families into the school consisting of, but not limited to workshops conducted by school staff members, Chats with the Principal, District 31 Family fun day, PTA Family Fun Nights, assemblies, fairs, conferences, after school art events, after school events for English language learners participating in enrichment activities and class and grade level workshops. Families received information regarding student performance and progress through benchmark reading level letters generated through Assessment Pro, ELA and Math benchmark assessment results, Parent Teacher Conferences, workshops and individual meetings with teachers. -According to the NYC School Quality Guide from 2017-2018, Strong Family-Community ties remains our second strongest component of the school conditions and practices from the Framework for Great schools just following Rigorous Instruction with a score of 4.04. - According to the Midyear report for 2017-2018 of Parent Participation at school-wide celebrations and events there was an increase in parent attendance and involvement during Open school week from 216 to 233 parents and for Academic Celebrations and Workshops from 536 parents in 2016-2017 to 644 in 2017-2018 which did not include parent attendance at extracurricular after-school events. End of year cumulative data comparing 2016-2017 to 2017-2018 data is pending; however, these authentic opportunities prove to be our greatest success and ones on which we will continue to build. Although we are holding steady in terms of parent participation and involvement across the grades and school we are always seeking to improve our efforts. During our curriculum planning for the 2018-19 school year, teacher teams along with the Staff developers and Administration outlined the year ahead including the pacing of the Units of Study in all content areas, potential celebrations, and assessments. With the expectations clearly outlined, in order to provide alignment across the school community and increase communication and opportunities for family involvement, we will continue to incorporate grade level information via the school website, culminating celebrations, parent workshops, and authentic learning partner opportunities in the classrooms. Additionally, in alignment with providing equity and excellence for all students we aim to improve our cultural responsiveness to both our students and their guardians at PS 41R by drawing on the rich reservoir of expertise and varied cultures of our families in an effort to support all students and ensure all see their place within our school walls. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 36  By June 2019, all teachers and staff will work together in teams to provide access and opportunities for families to participate in their children’s education across classrooms and content areas. This will result in increased family participation in the school community as evidenced by a comparison of sign in sheets and agendas from 2017-2018 to 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent/Guardian communication during the school year will be ongoing for the purpose of communicating and educating parents on academic programs, school-wide policies and efforts, as well as ascertain families' specific wants and needs related to our school wide practices. Parents/ Guardians September 5, 2018-June 21, 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator ENL teacher Grade level teams will decide upon which Units of Study will have culminating celebrations in Reading, Writing, and Mathematics that will be shared with families. Dates will be outlined and forwarded to families. Parents as Learning Partner opportunities, outside of the Parent Teacher Conference months (September, November, March, and May) will support an understanding of the instructional program and allow parents to learn alongside their children in an authentic setting. As an outgrowth of our LPP teacher team, teacher leaders will provide opportunities for parents of immigrant students and students receiving English Language Services to participate in a parent group designed to influence teacher practice by sharing and presenting information and nuances relevant to the various cultures that abound at P.S.41R. Teacher leaders will avail themselves to provide additional support to families of students from other cultures relevant to the academic expectations to which their children are held accountable. Parent Coordinator, in concert with the PTA, will work closely with all families to ensure all students are represented through an increase in multi-cultural events and celebrations; parent partnership-book study opportunities; increased translation Teachers Parent Coordinator Administration Parent Coordinator Teachers Administration Parent Coordinator Teachers Administration Teacher Leaders Parent Coordinator Principal September 5, 2018-September 29, 2018 October 2018 January 2019 April2019 1 x per month during the Title 3 after school program; October 2018-April 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Students Parents/ Guardians Teachers Parents Students Teacher leader Parents Students receiving English Language Services Parents 2018-19 CEP 38 services and communication; as well as parent workshops aligned to student/parent needs. These efforts are designed to establish trust within our learning community creating a risk free environment where all students can learn. Translation team Assistant Principals PTA Multicultural events- 4 times throughout the year; Monthly Parent book study; Ongoing translation services at parent events 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. P.S. 41R has retained close partnerships with many local businesses and community based organizations. The School Assessment team and guidance counselor work closely with local mental health and community outreach programs to assist our families with strategies to support their children as they grow into young adults. Some organizations are: YMCA; Jewish Community Center (JCC) and the Staten Island Mental Health Society and Camp Good Grief. P.S. 41 has maintained a long standing partnership with the Police Athletic League (PAL) which allows our families an opportunity for their children to receive after-school supervision while receiving homework help, participating in sports, lessons, and fun activities on school grounds. P.S. 41 also maintains ties with the Local branch (New Dorp) of the New York Public Library. Classroom teachers and groups of parents visit the Library yearly to experience what it has to offer our students as a community resource. Parents are also directed to tutoring programs delivered by local high school students for our at-risk readers at the local branch. Lastly, P.S. 41R maintains relationships with our local Middle and high schools, I.S. 2, middle school, New Dorp High School and Staten Island Technical High School in an effort to ease transitions, establish relationships and provide students opportunities to set goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Supplies for workshops, newsletters, and celebrations Parent/Guardian Surveys Parent/Guardian Celebration Invitations, flyers, workshop materials Scheduling for horizontal and vertical teacher teams 2018-19 CEP 39  Review of the School Learning Environment survey Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 sign in sheets from parent events will show a 2.5% increase in parent participation as compared to comparable events from the 2017-2018 school year via attendance sheets and exit surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure that will be used to assess progress are: -Comparison of Parent Attendance at workshops and celebrations from 2017-2018 - Exit surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Analysis of student performance and progress as measured through formal and informal assessments: Running Records, Pre and Post Assessments, Benchmark Assessments, Observations Analysis of student performance and progress as measured through formal and informal assessments: Pre and Post Assessments, Benchmark Assessments, Observations Analysis of student performance and progress as measured through formal and informal assessments: Pre and Post Assessments, Benchmark Assessments, Observations Analysis of student performance and progress as Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided Reading, strategy groups, Orton Gillingham, Great Leaps, Myon, SPIRE, SRSD Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group One to one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Service will be provided during the school day, 2-3x per week, as a push-in model Small group One to one Go Math Reteach and Differentiated tasks and assignments. K-2 Game/Task alignment to Major work of the grade Service will be provided during the school day, 2-3x per week, as a push-in model During the lesson Weekly Reteaching, small group work, individualized opportunities Reteaching, small group work, During the lesson Weekly 2018-19 CEP 41  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) measured through formal and informal assessments: Pre and Post Assessments, Benchmark Assessments, Observations Social skills: Anti-bullying, peer-mediation, socialization, work habits- perseverance, resiliency, time on task individualized opportunities At the moment of occurrence, crisis intervention, pre-referral service, peer mediation Small group, one to one, push-in-pull-out Services will be provided during the school day, scheduled with the Guidance Counselor as per at risk needs 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 11 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. PS 41 supports students in temporary housing by supplementing or covering costs for students to purchase supplies from the supply lists, backpacks, and/or other school related items. In addition, students in temporary housing may attend additional after school programs that may require payment from student families (Ex: additional after school test preparation courses etc) and/or Grade 5 events related to Graduation. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 43  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 44  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Resumes are reviewed to ensure each candidate is highly qualified. P.S. 41R offers professional development that supports staff in deepening knowledge of content and pedagogy in English Language Arts and Mathematics as well as best practices for aiding students' social and emotional development through our partnerships with Teachers College Columbia University, Learning Partners Program, National Training Network, Sanford Harmony, NYU, and our neighboring District 31 schools and Field Support Center. During the school day, professional development is provided by the Staff developers, Mentor teachers, Administration, Instructional Leads, and from peers aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and Danielson Framework for Teaching, through workshops, planning sessions, teacher team meetings, and inter-visitations. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In addition to the Monday professional learning for teacher and paraprofessional teams, Teachers College Staff Developers will provide twenty in-school staff development sessions across the school year for teachers in Kindergarten-Grade 5. A team of teachers in Kindergarten-Grade 1 will participate in a mini-institute focused on deepening their phonemic awareness and phonics' knowledge in August 2018. The core Learning Partner team, comprised of teachers and Administration, will collaborate with our triad schools, through monthly school visits and weekly team meetings focused on the achievement of English Language Learners. Math teachers in Grade 5 will participate in a 12 day Algebra for All professional learning during the summer with continued support throughout the school year. Paraprofessionals will continue to deepen their knowledge and skills through learning teams focused on professional book and case studies. The Principal will engage in Principal Learning Conferences at Teachers College, Columbia University and District 31 monthly Principal Learning Sessions. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 45  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). A Kindergarten Orientation was held in June 2018 to welcome families and share the expectations for the upcoming school year. The NYSITELL was administered in June 2018 to all in-house Pre-K students to determine placement for students learning English as a new language (ENL) into General Education classrooms. Data derived from the Turning 5 evaluation process is shared with the Kindergarten classroom teachers prior to September 2018 to ensure tailored instruction and appropriately aligned tasks from the onset. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As mentioned previously, P.S. 41R houses many teams designed to hear from as many voices as possible and tap into the expertise in the building. Decisions regarding the use and selection of assessments and measures of student learning are informed by discussions at various teacher team meetings. Through the 2017-2018 grade level planning sessions, teacher teams refined formative assessments for each Unit of Study, discussing baseline, midpoint, and summative assessments to measure performance and progress. A Grading Policy Team was formed in the Spring of 2018 to select assessments, establish policies for grading, and select multiple measures for student promotion that will be shared with the community in September 2018. Expertise was drawn at each grade to ensure full representation of the school community. Data generated from the assessments is shared at teacher team inquiry meetings to identify trends and determine next steps. All inquiry work begins by looking at student work. Planning sessions are provided throughout the year to support instruction as a result of student needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 2018-19 CEP 46  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, and 5e N/A N/A N/A Sections 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, and 5e Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 380,244.00 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 4,026,607.00 x N/A N/A N/A x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 47  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 48  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Stephanie A. Vierno School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Stephanie A. Vierno School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to meet Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS); ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center via a digital library; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 41R, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 51  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 52  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 53  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 55  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After reviewing summative data such as NYSESLAT data from the RLAT, and the NYS ELA, as well as formative data including TC reading levels, and teacher observations from reading responses and writing assignments, we will identify groups of English Language Learners in grades 1-5 who are not meeting grade level standards in literacy. These Level 1 and 2 students will be invited to participate in the Title III Program. We will be organizing our subgroups in grades 1-5 by combining no more than two grades per group based on teacher availability, anticipating up to approximately 15 students per teacher per group. There will be up to five bilingual or TESOL certified teachers in the program. These teachers will all maintain attendance rosters and work portfolios. The sessions will run on Thursdays from 2:45 to 4:00 on the following dates: 10/18, 10/25, 11/1, 11/8, 11/15, 11/29, 12/6, 12/13, 12/20, 1/,3 1/10, 1/17, 1/24, 1/31, 2/7, 2/14, 2/28, 3/7, 3/14, 3/21, 3/28. Instruction will be in English with native language supports as needed. The program will combine components of art, photography/scrapbooking, cooking, and STEM. All components of the program will involve the four modalities: speaking, listening, reading and writing. This will ensure higher academic achievement of their receptive and productive language skills. During the art component of the program, students will take part in read alouds, listen to different genres of music and produce a piece of artwork that they will write and talk about to their peers. During the photography/scrapbooking component, students will connect the writing process to create their own individualized scrapbook. In the cooking component, students will sample the ingredients prior to making the recipe. They will listen and speak with one another to discuss what they think about the ingredients; jot down their observations and finally read and make the recipes. Students will write in various genres such as Informational and Opinion writing and incorporate Poetry when discussing and writing about their cooking experiences. The STEM component will allow students to take part in read alouds to deepen their understanding of science principles and engineering. Students will also develop written plans for the structure they will build. They will present their working structure to their peers. These opportunities will provide students crucial time to listen and speak to one another to accomplish tasks as per the Common Core Listening and Speaking Standards. All components will include the integration of technology. Parents will be invited to share their family and cultural traditions during the components as well as receive invitations and/or phone calls when required in their respective home languages. Materials used include cardstock and paint supplies for art, the food for taste tests and actual recipes which vary influenced by students' cultures and collaboration. A color printer and ink for all components if the program. Scrapbooking materials include: colored paper, sheet protectors, rings, crayons, glue, and developed pictures taken during the cooking portion. STEM materials would include different child friendly building materials. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: English Language Learners at PS41 are primarily grouped between 1- 2 classroom teachers per grade in part to improve articulation between the ENL and classroom teacher, as well as make the Integrated and Standalone ENL program work to its fullest potential and meet the mandates of CR Part 154. Several teachers of our English Language Learners, including our Title III teachers, are part of the Learning Partners Program (LPP) through the Office of Inter-school Collaborative Learning (OICL). This partnership promotes inter-school collaborative learning and leverages the rich reservoir of expertise that resides in the participating school communities in order to improve outcomes for all students with a focus area supporting language and English Language learners. The Learning Partners team will provide professional learning opportunities for a select group of teachers that will pilot the work and act as conduits to the rest of the school community. ENL teachers and LPP Team members also work to complement the formative assessment practices embedded in the school curriculum with a close look at ELL data. Using language progressions and language objectives along with content objectives they work on tailoring instruction for individual and groups of ELLs guided by our ENL teachers. This work directly impacts the service delivery around units of study in all classrooms as well as units within the Title III program. The LPP team will meet every Tuesday for 50 minutes which will be built into the weekly schedule. The core members are our ENL Teachers, Mrs. Jodi Adinolfi and Mrs. Christie Laino, joined by teachers of English language Learners in both the General Education and Dual language programs: Mrs. Natalie Nowrocki, Ms. Brenda Mendez, Ms. Porsche Linwood, Mrs. Thiemer and Ms. Cadena, all who will support the turnkey work with identified members of the staff. The meetings will take various forms such as planning sessions, data analysis, classroom inter-visitations, lab study/observations of students, all aligned to an inquiry into our students' needs. The ENL teachers or core team members will also provide professional learning opportunities for staff members during 40 minute blocks on Tuesday afternoons monthly and support individual teachers of Language Learners on the alternating Tuesdays. To support the development of the team members, once a month, the LPP team will meet for a full day of professional learning with partner schools in the district: P.S. 16, P.S. 44 and P.S. 68 and members of the Office of Inter-school Collaborative Learning (OICL) for professional development (Dates to be determined). For the past two years, as part of a partnership and professional development with P.S. 22 and P.S. 16, the team (and former team members) worked to develop language objectives within content areas; hone specific skills and strategies that support our Language learners when tackling challenging texts and examine structures to develop academic and conversational discourse in preparation for writing and classroom discussions. These learning opportunities and inquiries have been the basis of the professional learning that was shared with the rest of the staff as the LPP team members greatly influenced and worked to build capacity amongst staff members. PS 41 will continue to participate in the Learning Partners Program with the aforementioned partner schools who are paired with P.S.41 for 2018-2019 based on similar needs of the English Language learners inclusive of those in Dual Language programs. This professional development will present no additional cost to the P.S.41 Title III program. Agendas and instructional documents were and will continue to be captured on Googledocs in a shared folder for team members to access and revise as appropriate. Finally, our school is participating in staff development with 2018-19 CEP 58  Part C: Professional Development Teacher's College for the third consecutive year. Our ENL and Dual language teachers work closely with our staff developers throughout the year during the ten scheduled professional learning days so that all staff are aware of the common end goals and pedagogical strategies and resources utilized to assist students in reaching proficiency including our language learners. As we await additional opportunities specifically geared to English Language Learners for the 2018-2019 school year, ENL teachers are invited to attend the following summer professional learning opportunities directly related to developing phonemic awareness of all students: Launching the First Grade Reading, Writing, and Phonics Units of Study with Ease and An Emphasis on Independence, as well as, Making Data-Based Decisions for the Upcoming Year: Realistic Plans for Regularly Using Performance Assessments to Track, Sustain and Guide Instruction on 8/30/18. As we embark upon enriching instruction in phonics and phonemic awareness these workshops will assist with school wide alignment and with the development of an inquiry focus with strategies to monitor and track the growth of our language learners. With a strong focus on alignment and collaboration around content and language objectives, as well as best practices school-wide, we are certain that the ELLs in our Title III Program will be positively impacted. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our summative and formative data in reading and writing indicates that our English Language Learners are not meeting grade-level literacy standards at the same rate as our Non-Ells. As we collaborate with parents and give them support that can be used at home, the Title III Program will be focused on increasing literacy skills to improve students learning. Parent engagement occurs throughout the program. Parents will be invited for four one-hour in classroom intensive participatory events. Parents come in for hands on involvement in either, art, photograpy/scrapbooking, cooking, or STEM. Parents will be invited to begin to gather ideas about what they can do to prepare their children for the Afterschool Program prior to the start. We will also be encouraging parental involvement as well as sharing how native language literacy supports the acquisition of English throughout the program. A parent focus group will be running alongside of our title three program targeting ways parents of ELLs can impact higher achievement for their children; led by Dual Language teacher, Mrs. Brenda Mendez. Additional topics will be covered with this group geared toward creating a more culturally responsive environment for our Language learners. In addition, meetings may include but are not limited to the following: how to use native language to support literacy and content areas; reading behaviors by level, and expectations by grade in reading and writing. The selection of topics to support our parents/guardians will develop out of feedback from parents, observations, and surveys. Additional parent surveys will be forwarded as per our CEP goal. Our providers will be Elvia Cadena in Grades 1/2, Melissa Thiemer in Grades 2/3, Christie Laino in Grade 3/4, Jodi Adinolfi in Grades 4/ 5. These pedagogues, trained in ELL Strategies, will support the parents in academic reading and writing through carefully designed tasks akin to a thinking curriculum. Even if a child reads in English, parents informed on curricular expectations can 2018-19 CEP 59 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities then pose comprehension questions in the native language. Our teachers, both classroom and ENL teachers, support all parents and our parents of English Language Learners, with frequent information as well as strategy sessions in reading, writing, and math so that they can understand our curriculum and assist with student learning at home. Interpreters are included as needed. We notify parents of all the activities in various ways which may include: a letter and schedule sent home, a posting on our school website, a voice message in English or Spanish via the school's messenger service, as well as individual phone calls. Records of all agendas and letters sent will be kept by the ELL Coordinator, Mrs. Jodi Adinolfi. Each teacher will maintain attendance records, agendas, and invitations for the duration of the program. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name The Stephanie A. Vierno School Borough Staten Island School Number 041 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jennifer Logan Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jodi AdinolfiChristie Laino Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Casais/Grade 2 DL Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Karen Cardinali Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Stacie Magnus Field Support Center Staff Member Enrico Domingo Other (Name and Title) Monica Munoz, Parent C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 2 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 61  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 666 Total number of ELLs 118 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.72% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 0 1 2 3 Lang. N/A K 0 0 0 Spanish 2012-13 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 4 0 1 1 5 0 1 1 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 5 0 0 5 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? A variety of formative assessments are utilized to inform instruction. PS41 uses TCRWP Running Records to provide students access to just right leveled texts. Through a miscue, fluency, and comprehension analysis, areas of individual strengths and next steps are identified and supported via individual conferences and small group instruction. Students in the primary grades are also provided early assessments consisting of Concepts of Print, Letter/Sound Recognition, Sight Word Recognition, and Phonemic Awareness. Students in Grades 3-5 engage in pre and post reading assessments aligned to Unit of Study target standards. Exemplars and student-facing checklists are analyzed with students to provide clear criteria for success and allow students to set goals toward mastery. In the area of Writing, students in Kindergarten-Grade 5 are introduced to mentor texts, exemplar writing pieces, rubrics and checklists to establish clear expectations at the onset of the Unit of Study followed by on-demand writing pieces across all grade levels. Teacher and peer conferences and feedback support students through 2018-19 CEP 62  the writing process focused on the goals established as per the pre-assessments. At the end of the unit, students self and peer assess their published writing and that of their peers. An on-demand post-assessment is provided to measure progress and performance of the standards. Students are also assessed with Estrellita in the Dual Language classes to measure early Spanish literacy skills. Our English Language Learners are continually assessed to maintain learning along the continuum of content and language development. Data derived from the multiple assessments is analyzed at the class, grade, and school level to inform decision making. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Staff members work collaboratively via Teacher Teams to support the development, implementation, and analysis of formative assessments across the school. Curriculum development and refinement is ongoing, as Teacher Teams meet and collaborate during Monday professional learning sessions focused on inquiry cycles of learning through an analysis of student work. Curriculum maps and resources are shared via Googledocs, allowing the ENL teachers to infuse scaffolds and language goals/objectives. Teacher Teams also collaborate through the support of Teachers College Staff Developers, visiting classrooms to work with individual and groups of students, to enhance plans and practice. Cycles of learning are established across the year by grade level. In addition, the Learning Partners Program P.S. 41 core team meets weekly at the school level and monthly as a quad, in partnership with fellow District 31 schools, to engage in cycles of learning focused on supporting English Language Learners. The team engages in professional reading, interschool visits, and analysis of student work, to inform practice toward increasing student achievement. Data is collected and tracked by the Administration through the submission of pre and post assessment results, disaggregated by subgroups. Instructional approaches specific to supporting English Language Learners, including but not limited to developing oral language via student discussion, vocabulary development, and the use of sentence frames is implemented in classrooms to provide greater access into the learning at their scaffolded levels. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative data from the NYSESLAT and NYS ELA and Math assessments is analyzed to identify and track both current performance levels and progress of our English Language Learners (ELLS) within and across years so that we may plan accordingly. Data analysis from 2016-2017 assessments reveals that our students are performing and progressing considerably better on the Speaking portion of the NYSESLAT as compared to the Reading, Writing and Listening. NYSESLAT data also points to student progress abating once children reach the Expanding proficiency level. NYS Assessment data places our English Language learners as our lowest performing sub group in ELA. Based on this summative data, classroom teachers are provided a template which identifies their students' NYSESLAT proficiency levels, the typical behaviors of students performing at these levels and instructional strategies and suggestions that can be used to scaffold instruction to support growth. Pre and Post assessment data is gathered and disaggregated by subgroups to show performance and progress of English language learners for every Reading and Writing unit of study throughout the year. Standard aligned checklists, rubrics and exemplars are utilized by teachers and student partnerships to support students with measuring their progress and advancing along a progression of expectations leading to mastery of grade level content and beyond. A beginning, midyear, and end of year benchmark assessment is provided in Mathematics for students in Kindergarten-Grade 5. In addition, end of unit assessment data in Mathematics is collected approximately ten times per year, disaggregated by subgroups and analyzed for trends and areas of need to inform instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative data, such as the NYSESLAT and NYS ELA and Math Assessments, is analyzed during the summer to inform program adjustments and initial intervention supports. During the school year, pre and post assessment data is submitted at the close of each Unit of Study to the Administration. Administration and Teacher Teams review the data and note areas of strength and concern. Data chats are held with classroom teachers to discuss individual students that are not making expected progress. In addition, the RTI/PPT meets frequently to discuss individual student progress and performance. Students are submitted for review by the classroom teachers, Related Service Providers, ENL teacher, and Administration to secure appropriate supports and services. The team, comprised of Administration, service providers, and the SAT share expertise in developing next steps for individual learners. Supports may be in the form of additional personnel services, strategies for teachers at the Tier 1 classroom level, or referral for further evaluation. 2018-19 CEP 63  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 41 implements multi-tiered, evidence-based instruction matched to our ENL students' instructional needs. Students are initially identified and grouped for RTI instruction based on their performance on the NYS Assessments, NYSESLAT proficiency levels, and on the Teachers College grade level benchmark assessments. All level 1 and 2 English Language Learners are provided tiered supports. Students may receive periods of push in Reading and Writing instruction and are progress monitored after 6-8 weeks utilizing various assessments. Our goal is for all students to develop the necessary skills to access the standards-based curriculum. This in turn will assist English Language Learners as they work towards meeting or exceeding state grade level standards. Students are additionally evaluated in writing utilizing the Language Progressions which outline expectations for English Language Learners in each of the five stages of the language continuum to inform instruction. Moreover, developed by the Language Team, writing checklists aligned to the five proficiency levels (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding) have been developed to provide greater access and clarity of expectations for teachers and students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our NYSITELL data currently reveals a range of proficiencies from entering to commanding. As per the RLAT when looking across multiple years of the administration of the NYSESLAT, the data reveals that most of our ELLs who were first enrolled at PS41 are moving to Expanding and Commanding after 2-3 years of service. As mentioned above in question #3 the results from the NYSESLAT administration and the ELL Data Analysis Tool allow us to identify the proficiency levels of our students and look overall at the performance of each tested grade band in order to group students accordingly and consider instructional plans for specific classes and units of study. Further, the ELL Data Analysis Tool( EDAT), specifically the Key Student Summary Report, allows us to summarize specific students' risk factors and other considerations. Along with teacher expertise of the typical behaviors of students performing at each proficiency level, the EDAT also provides us with the number of students at each modality and their strengths and needs. This report is analyzed closely by our ENL teachers to assist them with planning and providing targeted integrated and stand alone instruction to the ELLs they service. The data organized within the EDAT allows the LPP team to drill down and focus instruction to targeted groups of students in an effort to close the achievement gap and bring best practices to the larger school community. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Student proficiency levels as per the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT are communicated to families and teachers. Families receive their child's results at the beginning of the school year and are invited to meet individually and in groups with ENL teachers regarding their child's needs and the ENL program. During September curriculum conferences, methods and strategies teachers employ to support Language learners' specific needs are shared with parents. Based on an analysis of data, the ENL teacher provides spreadsheets to classroom teachers that identify each child's level of language proficiency along with the typical behaviors exhibited by students at these levels and instructional strategies that can be implemented to support their development. At the start of the year ENL teachers share their expertise with cooperating classroom teachers of ELLS and teachers in the Dual language program in an effort to meet the needs of all students as per the findings from the summative data. Students are programmed utilizing this data and provided the appropriate integrated and stand-alone minutes aligned to the proficiency levels. Our Language team (LPP team) analyzes summative data from the NYSESLAT and NYS ELA assessments as well as students' Reading levels, to identify areas of need and possible root causes. From there the team develops an action plan for tackling one area of need at a time through targeted instruction, intervention and progress monitoring. Teachers on the language team meet weekly to plan and discuss the work they are doing with their targeted groups of ELLS. Opportunities for all other teachers to meet on Tuesdays during professional learning time is made available by administration and delivered by members of the language team. Members of the team share the work they are doing to close the achievement gap with the remaining staff. In addition, ENL teachers attend grade level professional development sessions delivered by Teachers College Staff developers in the area of reading and writing and offer scaffolds to support the instruction of Ells when planning. Teachers work together to integrate language instruction into the classroom Readers and Writers Workshops through approaches that provide access to the English Language Learners. Students are then supported in small groups and conferences while visual and language supports are embedded into whole-class practice. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The English Language Learners and former English Language Learners in our Freestanding ENL program are heterogeneously block-grouped across 1-2 classrooms by grade. All English Language Learners, inclusive of Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding ELLs are meeting their 180 or 90 minute mandate during integrated ENL as appropriate. The Entering and Emerging ELLs will receive their remaining minutes of stand-alone ENL during pull-out sessions with the ENL teachers. In Kindergarten-Grade 5 instruction is shared by the classroom teacher and the ENL teachers during those integrated minutes utilizing co-teaching models. The ENL teachers will infuse scaffolding strategies to help the classroom teacher differentiate for those ELLs and FELLs at all times. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Our self-contained Grade 1-5 Spanish/English Dual Language classrooms are heterogeneously grouped. Instruction is delivered by one appropriately certified Spanish/English bilingual teacher on each grade. They follow the roller coaster model of instruction, ensuring that equal time is devoted to English and Spanish instruction, embedding scaffolds for students learning a new language. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Beginning in the 2017-2018 a second full time ENL teacher was secured to ensure that all English Language Learners are meeting their mandated number of ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes as per CR Part 154. Once students are grouped appropriately by the ENL teachers, they are programmed in STARS to ensure accuracy. In Kindergarten-Grade 5 the ENL teachers will co-teach with the classroom teachers to provide the mandated number of Integrated ENL minutes. The remaining mandates will be provided as standalone ENL by the ENL teachers. In our Dual Language classes the DL teachers will provide the mandated ENL, ELA, and HLA minutes of instruction. To ensure continuity of instruction, ENL and Dual Language teachers participate in professional learning during Teacher Team meetings, Learning Partner meetings, and Teachers College Staff Development. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our Grade 1-5 5 Dual Language Program, the content is delivered both in English and Spanish through a 50/50 roller coaster model. Core subjects are taught both in English and Spanish, alternating days, throughout the week. Within the integrated ENL program, the ENL teachers collaborate with the classroom teachers during ELA instruction and differentiate according to the English Language Learners' proficiency levels. In Writing, we incorporate differentiated TC checklists to better assess the ELLS at their five proficiency levels. During standalone ENL, the ENL teachers continue to align with TC ELA content while incorporating language development and alignment with the Common Core Learning Standards. Both within the ENL and DL 2018-19 CEP 65  programs as well as throughout our classrooms, access to the content is provided through methods such as but not limited to visuals, TPR, UDL, gesturing, and differentiation. Our curriculum across the school is aligned to the CCLS with an emphasis on the six shifts in ELA and Math. In any classroom, Word Walls with Tiered vocabulary, pictures and examples are evident. Furthermore, we implement the deconstruction of juicy language as per professional learning facilitated by MaryAnn Cucchiara as we scaffold complex text for ELLs and all learners. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In our Spanish Dual Language program students are evaluated throughout the year according to the programs used such as Estrellita for phonics instruction and Go Math’s Spanish edition. The English Language Learners are also evaluated in their native language in the Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of Study. Eligible Grade 3-5 students also receive translation services or translated assessments for the NYS Mathematics and Science State Assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We currently have no SIFE students. As one of the most vulnerable at-risk subgroups of ELLs it is imperative that we utilize innovative approaches in order to appropriately serve them should they arrive. If a SIFE student enrolls at our school moving forward, we would utilize the SIFE Oral interview Questionnaire to collect information about the student's family and home background, educational history and literacy practices as appropriate. Depending on the age of the student at time of enrollment, we may administer the Multilingual Literacy SIFE screener (MLS) to determine the literacy levels of SIFE students in their home language and the Writing screener to identify students' basic writing skills in order to provide appropriate placement and instruction for them and further assess the literacy needs and skills of these students using school based assessments in both English and in their home language to the extent possible. Once needs are determined their oral language would be encouraged using QTEL strategies that effectively accommodate students at all proficiency levels. We would also incorporate the SIFE’s native language and prior knowledge, and include scaffolds such as visuals, graphic organizers, experiential learning, TPR and role-playing carefully differentiating the content, process, and product. Bilingual books and curriculum materials are available in our library as well as content-area books written at lower levels without diluted information. Finally, the New York State Education Department's Office of Bilingual Education and World Languages has created a suite of resources in order to ensure that we as ELL educators have what we need to implement CR Part 154. These include: A comprehensive set of tools for identifying and serving Students with Interrupted/Inconsistent Formal Education (SIFE); A revised Home Language Questionnaire and accompanying guidance with individual interview questions; the PENPal Translation Pen as available; an ELL ID Chart with accompanying guidance and revised Units of Study tables; Former ELL Services guidance; Updated bilingual glossaries and cognate lists; Notification letters to send to parents regarding their child's NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores and eligibility to receive English Language Learner (ELL) services;. The New York State Bilingual Common Core Progressions, which address each Common Core standard and demonstrates how ELLs at all levels of language development can reach the Common Core standards and translated the P-12 Math Curriculum Modules into the top 5 ELL home languages spoken in NYS. We will access the appropriate resources necessary by visiting www.nysed.gov. For newcomers, the ENL teacher works in small focused groups providing specific scaffolds. During writing this includes the use of pictures, picture dictionaries, google images and google translate, graphic organizers, role playing, and rehearsing orally before writing. They may also be partnered with more advanced students who act as interpreters to check comprehension. All newcomers are encouraged to write in their native language in order to convey meaning. They will use a differentiated writing checklist during Writers Workshop. During reading instruction, the student may partner read and use talking prompts to develop oral language and strengthen comprehension. Reading in the native language is always encouraged and employed when there is literacy in the L1. Students are engaged through content area read alouds around planned units of instruction. They also use talking prompts and sentence frames during small group work, engage in QTEL activities that incorporate learners at all proficiency levels in all four modalities, and participate in the deconstruction of “juicy” language to encourage their academic vocabulary, and critical thinking about how language works. This work directs them to read closely 2018-19 CEP 66  and comprehend more advanced academic language within complex text as indicated by the CCLS. English Language Learners in years 4-6 are are participating in content-based language lessons with language objectives and differentiated tasks. Furthermore, they are participating in RTI groups throughout the school if they meet the criteria. They may also be involved in the deconstruction and tiered vocabulary work occurring across the school. At PS41 we recognize the importance of having the whole school engaged in teaching the English Language Learners. Everyone is focused on developing vocabulary and language, interactive learning, metacognitive strategies and explicit instruction. For English Language Learners in the upper grades who could potentially be long-term ELLs, we have certain models of good instruction in place. In addition to many of the reading and writing strategies that have been described, we would strive towards ways to increase motivation and engagement. In addition all students reading below grade level are participating in RTI groups throughout the school year. Currently, these groups meet for six-week cycles. At the end of a cycle, the students are re-evaluated and updated with compatible reading skills and strategies. If necessary they will be assigned to another group which corresponds to their level and needs. Long-term ELLs would participate in this intervention. Our Former English Language Learners are programmed with classrooms containing ELL students. They receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA during integrated ENL. The classroom teachers get support from the ENL teacher as needed. In addition, as previously mentioned, all teachers are engaged in best practices such as text deconstruction, tiered vocabulary, and Universal Design for Learning. All students below grade level are participating in RTI school-wide. Our testing coordinator is aware of the testing accommodations for F-ELLs for two years after passing the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? As tailored instruction for individual learners is our Instructional Focus, teachers receive ongoing professional learning focused on formative assessment practices and instructional approaches to ensure access for all learners. All teachers and especially those who teach English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities, plan carefully with instructional strategies such as Universal Design for Learning and differentiation to ensure that we are meeting the rigor of the CCLS. They are providing access to the curriculum with differentiated tasks that provide the means of achieving learning objectives. Their rooms are labeled, color-coded, appropriately print rich and full of charts, visual displays, and manipulatives. They are aligned on the grade, using the same curriculum and materials as the general ed classrooms. This includes TCRWP units of study for ELA as well as Go Math for their mathematics instruction. Our ELLs and SWDs are carefully monitored as needed at the bimonthly RTI/PPT meetings, so that more tiered intervention can be put into place as necessary. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students with Disabilities-English Language Learners are always placed in the least restrictive academic setting which allows them to best achieve their IEP goals. Decisions are carefully and collaboratively attained through PPT and IEP Team meetings. The ENL teachers provide Integrated ENL instruction in the classrooms of ELLs-SWDs in order to help them attain English proficiency while in a modified setting to meet their learning styles and achieve their goals. Mainstreaming when feasible allows access to the general education curriculum in order to ensure complete exposure and mastery in the CCLS. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All English Language Learners performing below grade level standards participate in our school wide RTI program which meets twice at least twice a week for 50-minute sessions. Students may be provided services from the RTI providers in ELA and/or Mathematics, focused on targeted small group instruction, through the use of research-based strategies and programs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? P.S. 41 continues to increase access to technology. The intention is to create opportunities for students that would not be possible without the use of technology, such as collaborating with peers across NYC and beyond, researching current 2018-19 CEP 67  materials, and translated versions of texts and daily news articles. P.S. 41 has also been invited to participate in the Learning Partners Program for the third consecutive year, focused on supporting English Language Learners, for a second year. As a core team, and together with our quad schools, we will further enhance our curriculum and instruction through inquiry cycles of professional learning. The addition of a second ENL teacher who is well-versed in the Teachers College curriculum and work of MaryAnn Cucchiara and Dr. Lily Wong Fillmore will continue to allow for an increased focus on instruction and deepen co-planning and professional learning across teams. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? For the past two years, we have experienced a shift in home languages and our data trends demonstrate that approximately 2/3 of families optfooor ENL services. The demand for the Kindergarten Dual Language program has declined for the 2018-2019 school year. As such, ENL students will be serviced across two general education classrooms with the support of the certified ENL teacher. Demand for the program will be monitored during the Kindergarten registration process to ensure we are meeting the needs of our community, and all languages will be considered for a possible future program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. English Language Learners who are performing below grade level in ELA and/or Mathematics are part of our RTI program. They are provided intervention strategies and services as appropriate. Our Title III program to which all ELLs are invited takes place after school. In addition, ELLs may attend ELA and Math test prep offered to all students after school during the spring semester. English Language Learners also participate in enrichment programs, such as Band, Chorus, and Visual Arts. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. English Language Learners will be provided greater access to technology for increased access to learning, aiding in obtaining resources and translations. Moving into the 2018-2019 school year, promethean boards will be added to all classrooms with document cameras, including the stand alone ENL classroom . We have also secured Myon user licenses for all students in Kindergarten-Grade 5. This software begins with an online baseline assessment which levels the student's reading and determines interest, then provides leveled texts in English and Spanish. Built in scaffolds include having the text read aloud to the student, text highlighting capability, and student annotating of content. A daily news featuring current events is also available. This software is utilized in school and at home throughout the school year and summer months. In addition, students in Grades 3-5 will continue to use ReadTheory, an online software that provides short passages across content areas with comprehension questions. The system levels the students following each passage. Student Apps will be provided that allow for the sharing of feedback and content with peers and teachers. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the Dual Language program the roller coaster model of instruction is used to balance instruction in Spanish and English, supporting students in becoming bilingual and biliterate. The DL classrooms have bilingual resources in Spanish and English as well. The ENL teachers keep a multi-lingual set of books in an array of the dominant languages at our school. The ENL teachers encourage the use of cognates between languages. In addition, through the use of technology, teachers provide access to Google translator and translated resources for students to fully participate in the learning. For Entering English Language Learners, some students may implement the skills and strategies in their native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. English Language Learners are mostly grouped at their grade level with 1-2 classroom teachers to enable integrated ENL service. For any remaining standalone ENL services, ELLs will be grouped by grade with no more than a two-grade span per group. The ENL teacher scaffolds and differentiates for individual learners using rigorous, grade-level texts and the TCRWP Units of Study. All ELLs are expected to demonstrate grade-level content-area learning at their proficiency levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 2018-19 CEP 68  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At registration, all parents and incoming students are met with to share the P.S. 41 offerings. Dual Language information sessions are provided during the morning, afternoon, and evening along with brochures and visits to classrooms. Translation services are provided through the LAC to ensure that all families may fully participate in their children's education. In the late Spring, Parents are invited to a Pre-K and Kindergarten Orientation in order to be prepared for the upcoming school year. Our Parent Coordinator, Stacie Magnus assists parents throughout the year to ensure they feel welcome and part of the school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives at the elementary school level. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? P.S. 41 uses a self-contained Dual Language program model. The ELLs are integrated for 100 percent of the school day. Most content areas rotate from English to Spanish through the roller coaster model. Any content taught by a cluster teacher—namely Science, Art, Music, Library, and Physical Education, is solely in English with that cluster teacher. The languages are rotated via the roller coaster model. The classroom is divided by red and blue sections—one color indicating English learning, and the other color indicating Spanish learning. Literacy is taught simultaneously in English and Spanish from the beginning. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All staff, including teachers of English Language Learners, engage in regular professional learning in Teacher Teams aligned to the P.S. 41 Instructional Focus of tailoring instruction to each individual learner. Teachers engage in inquiry cycles of learning at the team level to analyze student work aligned to the standards, share best practices, and design instruction to meet each child's strengths and areas of growth. In addition, teachers' professional growth is supported across twenty in-school sessions by Teachers College Staff Developers. Conference days, focused on ELL supports, are attended by teachers at Columbia University. A core Learning Partner Team comprised of the two ENL teachers, Dual Language Teachers, classroom teachers, and Administration will continue to meet weekly at the school level and monthly as a quad focused on ELL student achievement. Members of the LPP core team will provide weekly professional development on Tuesday afternoons for all ELL personnel during professional activities in addition to inter-class visitations and demonstration lessons that highlight ELL strategies and supports. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 69  As per CR 154.2 the school meets their 50% of total hours for bi-lingual education/ENL teachers for ELL specific Professional Development professional requirements in the following ways. The Language team has grown and is comprised of nine staff members, one model teacher of ELLs, 4 Dual language teachers, two ENL teachers and the Principal and Assistant Principal. This core language team meets monthly as part of the Learning Partners Program triad with three other schools in the District focused under the umbrella of developing Oral language and Academic Discourse amongst our ELL students in both ENL and Dual language classrooms. Each school level team then analyzes their own data to establish a problem of practice for which they meet and strategize to remediate. In addition to these full days of professional development, members of this team meet for one period weekly as a school team to extend the work begun on the full day sessions. The team continues to develop strategies and action plans aligned to guiding inquiry questions in support of improving student achievement. The team also plans for bringing the work to the larger school community. In an effort to offer the remaining school staff and teachers of ELLs opportunities for 15% of their professional learning time to be geared toward English Language learners we have the following structures in place. During alternating Professional Learning time on Tuesday afternoons every month, the core language team will offer the remaining staff a series of learning sessions. The Language team’s identified problems of practice for students at various proficiency levels are highlighted along with action plans and strategies the team and teachers are employing in an effort to close the achievement gap. Discussions on the intended, expected and realized student outcomes of this work are had and further planning based on student needs is able to commence. The remaining Tuesdays are made available for teachers of ELLs to plan closely with ENL teachers for their students utilizing the data and resources mentioned throughout this plan for the periods ENL teachers are providing integrated instruction in their classrooms. As per the ELL Policy Reference guide, a focus on co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for Ells will be prevalent. Further support is provided through twenty in house Professional Development and planning sessions offered throughout the year by Teachers College Staff Developers in the area of Reading and Writing. These sessions are attended by ENL teachers so that they may offer access areas for Ells by contributing scaffolds and supports aligned to specific units of study and added to curriculum maps and plans. These professional development sessions support teacher teams during grade level planning sessions in ELA to which the ENL teachers attend grade level sessions on rotating 4-6 week cycles. During all LPP and planning meetings a member of the team updates the shared folder on the Google drive with agendas, materials pertaining to the sessions, and minutes from meetings. In addition, attendance sheets and agendas are kept by the ENL teachers for all Professional learning sessions led by them or the LPP team. Grade leaders keep attendance sheets from the grade level planning sessions where ENL teachers are supporting. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to parent-teacher conferences, quarterly meetings, and initial parent orientations, ENL teachers will call all parents and invite them to participate with their child for an individualized annual meeting. Individual meetings will be planned for every ELL student to discuss the goals of the program, their child's language development progress, their child's English Language Proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas. The meeting will occur in the parents' preferred language of communication. Pertinent staff will be invited to attend with the ENL teacher. Qualified interpreters/translators will be involved as available or the services of the Interpretation/Translation unit will be utilized. These meetings may take place on the 40 minute Tuesdays dedicated to parental involvement activities. For parents who cannot attend, efforts will be made to have them participate via phone conversation utilizing translation services as needed. Parents will also be invited to participate during designated activities as part of our Title III program. This small group after school opportunity provides an intimate environment where parents of our English Language learners have similar needs and questions and can form a network with other parents of ELL's. These activities may include — storytelling in native language and English, scrap booking, cooking, reading partnerships, as well as workshops and classroom visitations to help understand the CCLS and instructional demands under which their children are expected to perform. The art teacher will hold workshops during parent engagement time offering an opportunity for families to create art together. The P.S. 41 website allows for relevant school messages to be posted and translated into any preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 70  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited to participate during designated activities as part of our Title III program. These activities may include— storytelling in native language and English, scrap booking, cooking, reading partnerships in English and native language, as well as workshops and visitations to help understand the CCLS and instructional demands under which their children are expected to perform. ELL parents as well as non-ELL parents are frequently invited to classrooms for writing celebrations and other school performances throughout the school year. For the 2018-2019, a family cultural responsive parent/guardian team will be developed. This team will be facilitated by Dual Language Teacher and offered after school hours during the Title III program. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 71 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jennifer Logan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 72  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Stephanie A Vierno School DBN: 31R041 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jennifer Logan Title Principal Karen Cardinali Assistant Principal Stacie Magnus Parent Coordinator Jodi Adinolfi ENL/Bilingual Teacher Monica Munoz Parent Melissa Casais/DL Teacher/Subject Area Catherine Denardo/Related Serv Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Denise Piazza School Counselor Anthony Lodico Enrico Domingo Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 2018-19 CEP 73  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R041 School Name: The Stephanie A. Vierno School Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Stacie Magnus Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All of our parents are an integral and welcomed part of our school community. Ensuring that our parents are partners in their children's learning as well as receiving ongoing feedback from families strengthens our collaboration. Parents of English Language Learners are informed about instruction, policies, and student progress throughout the year. Every effort is made to communicate with parents in their native language using translated letters and/or translation services. At different points throughout the year, we gather information from our families as a needs assessment via school-wide surveys, surveys specific to families of English Language Learners, and through our interactive workshops. Upon registration, we conduct a written and verbal survey with our ENL teacher and/or the LAC as we complete the home language survey. Parents/guardians share which language is preferred for communication. As students are enrolled and families complete the blue emergency card we make sure that it is done appropriately and the language selection is accurate. We review all forms with the parent/guardian. The teacher(s) are notified and record cards are shared with both the teacher and office staff. Based on this information, we develop and continuously update a list of languages reflective of our community to ensure effective communication. 2018-19 CEP 74  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Araucanian Albanian Arabic Azerbaijani Chinese Any Cantonese Greek Hebrew Hindi Italian Mandarin English Polish Russian Senufo Spanish Turkish Urdu Ukranian 0 13 4 1 38 0 1 1 1 2 0 667 3 25 1 103 1 1 4 0 1.5 0.46 0.12 4.38 0 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.23 0 76.93 0.35 2.88 0.12 11.88 0.12 0.12 0.46 1 15 6 1 35 3 1 1 1 2 1 600 6 24 1 103 1 1 4 0.12 1.73 0.69 0.12 4.04 0.35 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.23 0.12 76.12 0.69 2.77 0.12 11.88 0.12 0.12 0.46 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish 2018-19 CEP 75  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Family Welcome Letter, Parent Handbook, Principal letters, Discipline Code, Parent Bill of Rights and Responsibilities, Title I Meeting Notice, NYS Assessment letters September-June Newsletters and documents informing families of events, celebrations, Respect for All, etc. September-June Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May Holiday School Closing Announcements September-May How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents that are developed by the school are sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. September/October letters are forwarded during the summer. In addition, translated documents such as the Discipline Code, Parent Bill of Rights, and Title 1 Meeting Notice are available on the NYC DOE Intranet Documents are translated either by P.S. 41 staff members or Translation and Interpretation Unit Translated letters are available on the NYC DOE Intranet Translated letters are available on the NYC DOE Intranet 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Admissions September-June PTA events including monthly meetings, family fun events, sponsored school day events, Chat with the Principal, Parents as Learning Partners and workshops Parent Teacher Conferences, Curriculum Conferences, Parent Orientations (Dual Language, Pre-K, Kindergarten, etc.) September -June September, November, March, May interpretation service(s)? Translations are provided via Translation and Interpretation Unit phone services and/or bilingual staff members. including the ENL Teacher and Bilingual School Psychologist. Parents/guardians are provided the Parent's Guide to Language Access. Parents/Guardians will be provided translation services by volunteer parents/guardians and staff. We are exploring utilizing technology to further enhance translation. Translations are provided via Translation and Interpretation Unit phone services and on-site 2018-19 CEP 76  Progress reporting and IEP Conferences September-June interpretation, bilingual staff members, Big Word On-Site Translation Services Translations are provided via Translation and Interpretation Unit phone services, bilingual staff members including the ENL Teacher and Bilingual School Psychologist, and Big Word On-Site Translation Services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, the Language Access Coordinator can disseminate information to families via School Messenger, in which it is translated. A letter is distributed school-wide in translated versions. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are informed of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, ensuring all parents/guardians have full access to their children's education, during the staff professional learning and orientation in September. Information is provided in the Staff Handbook that is reviewed and signed for by all staff members at the inception of the school year. Staff members work alongside the Language Access Coordinator to support all parents/guardians. The Language Identification Guide is disseminated to staff by the LAC. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parent/guardian informational signs and the multi-lingual welcome poster is displayed at the primary entrance of the school. The Parent's Guide to Language Access brochure is available in the main entrance and main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our Parent Coordinator and staff is always available to assist families. Parents are asked to provide to us the ways and means in which they wish to communicate. Surveys are forwarded to the whole school to ascertain parent interest 2018-19 CEP 77  and needs. A second survey has also been developed by the Language Implementation Team to gather feedback from the parents/guardians of our English Language Learners. Each month, parents are invited to Chat with the Principal, a forum in which parents may ask question, express concerns, or share ideas. 2018-19 CEP 78 
