2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R054 School Name: P.S. 054 CHARLES W. LENG Principal: KAREN CATANZAROLAROSA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Public School 54 – The Charles W. Leng School 35-31-00-010054 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 31R054 1060 Willowbrook Road Staten Island, New York 10314 718-698-0600 Phone Number: 718-698-1736 Fax: Karen Catanzarolarosa KCatanz@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Email Address: Karen Catanzarolarosa Valerie Furnari Jill Laureno Stephanie Gabriele We are not a Title One School We do not have Student Representatives Student Representative(s): We do not have a CBORepresentative CBO Representative: District Information 31R054 Mr. Anthony Lodico Geographical District: Superintendent: 750 Ocean Terrace Staten Island New York 10301 Superintendent’s Office Address: alodico@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Staten Island Field Support Center FSC: Mr. Kevin Moran Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island New New York 10301 Executive Director’s Office Address: KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-556-8367 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Karen Catanzarolarosa Valerie Furnari Jill Laureno Barbara Kenney Stephanie Klein Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Assistant Principal Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Danielle Sorriento Stephanie Gabriele AbierElzemity Kevin Jay Lipsitz Michelle Smith Rebecca Ogno Christine Letona Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of P.S. 54 is to provide a safe and structured environment that will inspire and challenge all of our students to excel academically, become creative thinkers, problem solvers and lifelong learners. 2018-19 CEP 9  Our mission will be attained through the ongoing collaborative efforts of our diverse and multi-cultural school community. Families, faculty and staff are encouraged to all work together to ensure that our students reach their fullest potential in all their life endeavors. Vision Statement Our school motto, Tradition of Excellence,” reflects high achievement and ongoing motivation for students and staff. P.S. 54, a unique high profile school with a diverse student body, mirrors a community that recognizes and aspires to attain the finest educational opportunities for children. We envision highly motivated students, staff members and parents sharing in the accountability and responsibility of our “Tradition of Excellence.” 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. All the members of the P.S. 54 community pride themselves on being part of a P.S. 54 "Caring Community." We have instilled the values of respect, kindness and philanthropy into our school through service to others. Our Student Council is active in coordinating events such as food drives, pajama drives, Autism Awareness Drives and Go Orange For Animals Drive throughout the school year. Students beam when organizations come to PS 54 to collect the items from various drives. They also appreciate the many letters we receive from these organizations thanking us for our generosity. Teachers respect one another, work hard and collaborate to create rigorous, student centered learning environments. Students are happy when they enter our school building each morning and enjoy learning. For the 2018 - 2019 school year, we are enthusiastically continuing to implement the "Fill Your Bucket Program" to continue to build social and emotional growth. The premise of this program is simple - "Everyone carries an invisible bucket that holds our good thoughts and feelings. When our buckets are full, we feel happy and when our buckets are empty, we feel sad. Children quickly learn that they can fill buckets when they say and do things that are kind, considerate, caring and respectful. They also learn that when they are mean, inconsiderate, uncaring, or disrespectful, they dip into actions and words that can fill a bucket or dip into it. This school year, we are continuing to encourage, remind and recognize every one's efforts to be bucket fillers at home, school and everywhere they go. We are also continuing to implement the Sanford Harmony program which will further build self esteem and emotional well being. Student diversity is alive P.S. 54. Our Pre -K through Grade 5 enrollment is currently 820 students, 48.09% are male and 51.91 % of our student population are females. P.S. 54 averages 126 students per grade, with our average class size at 29 students. 27% of our population receives special education services. 57% of our students come from economically disadvantaged households. None of our students live in temporary housing. Our attendance rate is 95%. The demographic breakdown is as follows: 37% white, 33% Asian, 24% Hispanic and 6% Black. Students of many cultures make up our student body. The languages our students speak are Chinese, Mandarin, Urdu and Spanish. Each culture is respected and students learn from one another. Our English as a New Language teachers and our Parent Coordinator celebrate all cultures through celebrations throughout the school year. These celebrations afford all students an opportunity to learn and respect cultures from around the world. Two areas of celebration at P.S. 54 is our work around The Core Collaborative and our partnership with Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project. Our school goal and the goal of the Core Collaborative is to build Assessment Capable Learners. Teachers are conscious to continuously refine their practice of teaching with clarity through crafting precise Learning Intentions and Success Criteria. Students are becoming proficient at creating Success Criteria with their teacher. Our students are also self assessing and peer assessing their work in Math and English Language Arts. Students take ownership of their work. They know where they are at each moment of their learning. They know where they are going with their learning and can orate how they will get to their next steps in their learning. We have embraced the work around the Core Collaborative and so have our students! At the beginning of the 2017-2018 school year, PS 54 became a partnership school with Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project. Our teachers were given many opportunities to attend Teacher's College Calendar Days to deepen their work in literacy. Many teachers took advantage of these calendar days and turn-keyed the information they 2018-19 CEP 10  learned to their colleagues. The benefit of becoming a partnership school, is the rich professional development that was provided throughout the year. PS 54 had two staff developers - one specifically for grades K-2 and one specifically for grades 3-4. These staff developers worked with our teachers and conducted demonstration lessons in the classrooms. The teachers then had the opportunity to "try" what they learned in a lab site while the staff developer coached in. This best practice helped the teachers refine their craft while giving them the support of an expert in literacy. Unfortunately, due to lack of funding, PS 54 is not able to continue the partnership with Teacher's College for the 2018-2019 school year. We are going to embed the skills and strategies learned through the partnership into our ELA curriculum. This year our Fifth Grade Math Teachers have been trained in Algebra For All. This program will be implemented into our math program. To assist the teachers, we will be partnered with a Math Coach from NTN. This will provide ongoing professional development for our math teachers. In the 2017-2018 school year, PS 54 began a partnership with City Harvest through the Cooking Matters Program. This program was piloted by our Physical Education Teacher and two fifth grade teachers and with their classes, including one ICT class. Cooking Matters is a hands-on cooking/nutrition program taught by the teachers and a professional chef that empowers students with the skills to choose and prepare healthy food and snack alternatives as part of "The No Kid Hungry" Campaign to end childhood hunger in America. This program has been extended to all five fifth grade classes for the 2018-2019 school year. We also have a partnership with Sundog Theatre which offers art-based instruction for our special needs K-5 students. They bring professional teaching artists into the schools to work with children in theatre, dance, visual arts and music. This program adheres to Common Core, NY Learning Standards, and the NYCDOE Blueprint for Teaching and Learning in the Arts, Our students learn to persevere, think critically, work cooperatively, hone listening skills, explore imagination and innovation, consider career opportunities, and explore the arts. Our parent coordinator reaches out and partners our school with outside organizations. Our local Jewish Community Center sponsors an ESL class for parents that is taught on site at PS 54 during the school day. Also planned is a program with Cornell Medical Center to teach healthy cooking to our ELL parents, whereby they learn to "tweak" favorite cultural dishes to make them heart healthy. Both of these programs will continue during the 2018-2019 school year. We showcase an International Thanksgiving celebration in November and an International Food Festival in June. We are partnered with Borough President James Oddo's Child Wellness Initiative. We are represented on the committee by one of our PE teachers who is a member of the Schools Wellness Group along with Stephanie Caloir, Health Director, NYC DOE Staten Island Field Support Center. P.S. 54 was selected this year to be part of District 31 coalition in which a team of teachers from our school will be mentoring teachers from two other Staten Island Schools in the Core Collaborative. A team . of teachers along with the administration attended training over the summer to prepare them to lead this work. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Students with Disabilities continue to be our priority for the 2018-2019 school year. We currently have 180 students with IEP's which is 22% of our student population. 51% of the 180 students (92 students) are currently in ICT classes. 31% (56 students) are in 12:1:1 classes. 10% receive related services only. Because these students need extra support in order to close the achievement gap, we have incorporated the Sundog Theatre 3D Program into the curriculum for extra assistance in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. 11% of our students are English Language Learners. Many of them come from their native countries where English is not their native language. Parents often take them back to their native countries where no English is spoken over school break. We currently have 72 ELL students which make up 11% of our population. Of those 72 students, 67% are 2018-19 CEP 11  in a general education setting while 32% receive special education services. According to the NYSESLAT data as of 10/11/2018, the breakdown in language proficiency is as follows: Kindergarten: 1 Entering, 1 Emerging, 2 Transitioning, 7 Expanding, 0 Commanding Grade 1: 1 Entering, 0 Emerging, 0 Transitioning, 9 Expanding, 2 Commanding Grade 2: 0 Entering, 1 Emerging, 1 Transitioning, 3 Expanding, 5 Commanding Grade 3: 0 Entering, 0 Emerging, 2 Transitioning, 4 Expanding, 8 Commanding Grade 4: 0 Entering, 0 Emerging, 2 Transitioning, 10 Expanding, 3 Commanding Grade 5: 0 Entering, 1 Emerging, 1 Transitioning, 4 Expanding, 4 Commanding Our students are from many diverse countries throughout the world. The majority of our students are from China and speak Chinese, Cantonese and Mandarin. The range of languages spoken by students of PS 54 include Urdu, Arabic, Malayalam, Italian and Spanish. At the present time we do not have SIFE (Students with Interruptrd Formal Education) students or students who live in temporary housing. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017-2018 school year PS 54 made the most progress in the 3 elements surrounding the core of Student Achievement: Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Collaborative Teachers. Intensive professional development was given around the work of the Core Collaborative. This training allowed teachers to deepen their work in this area and to provide rigorous instruction that is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. We have established a partnership with The Core Collaborative to help us advance in this work. During the 2017 - 2018 school year, we established a strong, vertical Impact Team, comprised of five teachers. This Impact Team worked alongside grade bands to implement feedback strategies such as TAG Protocol while also building Teacher Efficacy. They have worked with three of Dr. Paul Bloomberg's Protocols: Evidence Walks, Looking at Student Work and Calibration. These three protocols are embedded into our curriculum. Intensive professional development was given around the work of The Core Collaborative and Teacher's College Units of study to deepen the teacher's pedagogy in these areas. Teachers have unpacked the standards to create Learning Intentions and Success Criteria that were aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. The teachers focused on the structure of the mini-lesson which included 10-15 minutes of explicit teaching and modeling to strengthen the instruction in literacy. Students were given many opportunities to work independently in both reading and writing to practice what was taught in the mini-lesson. As the students worked independently, teachers learned to "coach in" and conference with individual students while recording authentic data on each child. These strategies, along with the TAG Protocol and positve feedback and reinforcement establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers alike. The data the teachers received helped them to change the trajectory of their lessons to meet the needs of all students in the class. Through our work on the vertical impact team, ample opportunities for classroom intervisitation, common preparation periods, and outstanding Professional Development offered to our teachers from many sources, including but not limited to, NYC DOE, Teachers College, and each other, our teachers have proven that they are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and PS 54. Our "Collaborative Teachers" support one another within a culture of respect while continuously improving their pedagogy. For the 2018-2019 school year, our key areas within the framework will remain the same as we deepen our work within each of the 3 elements mentioned above. In addition, we will focus more attention on providing a ring of "Trust" (the 6th element within the framework), around our community of staff, parents, students, and administrators to value each other while working toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes. We will do 2018-19 CEP 12  this through improved communication : The PS 54 website, progress reports, newsletters, phone blasts, the app. "Remind", Parent-Engagement Tuesdays, PTA meetings , and the efforts of the parent coordinator. Better and more informed communication combined with opportunities to provide feedback between all involved groups will continue to develop an environment of understanding and trust within our PS 54 community.. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R054 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 806 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 53 51 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 38 31 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 60.0% % Attendance Rate 52.1% % Reduced Lunch 7.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 23.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 35.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.17 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 60.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 95% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 93 93 93.6% 7.2% 24.8% 5.8% 32.8% 2.6% 2 2% 6.8 66.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For the 2018-2019 school year, PS 54 will not remain a Teacher's College Partner School. Due to a lack of funding, we were unable to purchase Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project this school year. However, teachers will embed the skills and strategies they learned in the partnership last year. We also have identified Teacher Leaders, who are willing to help their colleagues continue this work. Both our Principal and Assistant Principal are "Teacher's College Trained" and will help move this work. This year we also have an Early Childhood Literacy Coach at PS 54 one day each week. She is Teacher's College trained and is going to help embed this work. Teachers will look at their pacing calendars and will refine and define them. They will also adjust their already existing curriculum maps based on the 2017-2018 school year to meet the needs of the students that are in their class. Teachers will remove things that really, "did not work," and add to things that, "worked well." Teachers will also continue to include built-in assessment dates for "on demand" reading and writing pieces. These pieces will be used as part of our Impact Team, where teachers use the protocol from Core Collaborative to calibrate and look at student work. The pacing calendars will provide a more rigorous and cohesive reading and writing program across grade levels. Teacher's will also use the Teacher's College Units of Study in Writing during the 2018-2019 school year. These units compliment the reading program. As the teachers work on creating lesson plans and curriculum maps for reading, they simultaneously create lesson plans and curriculum maps for writing. Teacher's in grades K-2 will implement daily Repeated Interactive Read Aloud. Each day, the teacher will read a book aloud to the students and focus on priority standards, RL 9, RL 10, RL11, specific to each grade. This is an initiative from The Core Collaborative. To provide a strong phonics program across the lower grades, we provided Orton-Gillingham Training to our kindergarten and first grade teachers. To date, we have all kindergarten teachers and four of the five first grade teachers trained in Orton-Gillingham. We will continue to train the remaining teachers in grades K-1 during the 2018-2019 school year. In addition, we have also trained one second grade teacher and three of the five third grade teachers in upper level Orton-Gillingham. Our SETSS Teacher and Speech Pathologist are also trained in Orton Gillingham in grades K-5. 2018-19 CEP 15  However, after analyzing our 2017-2018 data (students who met and did meet promotional criteria), it is noticed that 86 out of 243 students in grades 4 and 5 scored between 2.5 to 3.2 on the NYS ELA exam. To help these students meet or exceed grade level standards, we will be tracking them and they will be known as our "focus group". According to the New York State ELA exam (2017 - 2018), our school increased the level of 3 and 4's from 56% to 60.7%. This is an increase of 4.7% overall from the 2016 - 2017 school year. Our Students With Disabilities increase 4% from the previous school year and our ELL's went up 5% from the previous year. Although we have made gain, they are small. According to the New York State Math exam, our school increased the level of 3 and 4's from 62% in the 2016 - 2017 school year to 66% in the 2017 - 2018 school year. This is a 4% increase overall. Our Students with Disabilities made no gains in math. The level of 3 and 4's was 23% last year and remained 23% this year. Our ELL's increase the level of 3 and 4's from 23% last year to 41% this year. That is an 18% increase. Our school’s strengths relative to this Capacity Framework element are as follows:  We have deepened our work around The Core Collaborative Inititiative. We have had a Core Collaborative Constant work with our teachers for two full days around developing strong Impact Teams. Our teachers have developed a "common language" around the Core Collaborative. They continue to "teach to the standards" by writing standards based Learning Intentions and Success Criteria. Curriculum Maps have also been revised to reflect the work around the Core Collaborative. .  Our teachers are improving their craft of teaching with clarity due to the work we are doing with The Core Collaborative. They are writing clear Learning Intentions and Success Criteria. Success Criteria is also turned into as student friendly checklists to further ensure full understanding. Teachers have also created tools in reading and math to help students succeed. Students are aware of the expectations they must meet in every lesson. The result of all the above work is students becoming more independent and are on their way to becoming assessment capable learners.  Teacher's College Learning Progressions have been created on all grades along with exemplary pieces. Students self assess using the progressions and the exemplary pieces. Students are made aware of their "next steps" and work hard to achieve the next steps. All students are able to "speak" to the progressions. Formative Assessment is built into medial and end of all lessons in all subject areas. Teachers use this data to drive or change their instruction to meet the needs of all students.   We are deepening our work around Impact Teams for the 2018-2019 school year. We have an established Vertical Impact Team which provides professional development and helps implement new initiatives around curriculum and the work of Core Collaborative. For the 2018-2019 school year, we are going to create grade level Impact Teams in order for the work to be drilled down to each grade level..  We were selected to become part of the Guiding Coalition Team which is a District-wide Initiative. We were select due to our commitment to this work. Our school’s weakness relative to the Capacity Framework element are as follows: Students with disabilities consistently do not meet promotional criteria. We are going to focus on working closely with the students in our special education program. Interventions such as Orton-Gillingham, Repeated Interactive Read Aloud and small group instruction will be implemented into our English Language Arts Program. We have also won a grant with Sundog Theater and have their program, "Arts for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities" in our building for a 15 week cycle. Selected students with disabilities in grades 3-5 partake in this program. We have selected the students who participated last year with the exception of the Kindergarten class to see if a second year of the program will help the Students With Disabilities. Teachers will be held accountable to consistently assess student achievement through running records, reading conferences and classroom assessments. Principal and Assistant 2018-19 CEP 16  Principal will review and write comments for each piece of standards based student writing throughout the school year. Students will also be given a pre and post assessment at the beginning and end of each unit to measure growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 60% of all our students identified as our "focus group" in grades 4 - 5 (these are students who scored at levels 2.5 - 3.2 on the NYS ELA Test) will achieve a level 3 or 4 on the Spring 2019 NYS ELA Exam. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All Students in grades K-5. All teachers at P.S. 54 will use the Teacher's College Units of Study in Reading and Writing, as we are officially a partnership school with Teacher's College. Teachers will continue to write lesson plans and curriculum maps that incorporate Universal Design for Learning Principals (UDL) to provide multiple entry points for all learners with a focus on the above mentioned subgroups. These UDL strategies will include, but are not limited to the following: 1. Providing Multiple Means of Representation: OPTIONS FOR PERCEPTION:  Offering ways of customizing the display: font size,   graphs, contrast, color, etc alternatives for auditory information alternatives for visual information: provide text or spoken descriptions, physical objects, etc. OPTIONS FOR LANGUAGE:  Clarify vocabulary: pre-teach, connect to learners experience, provide graphics Illustrate through multiple media  Sept. 2018 – June 2019 during Monday PD, In addition TC Calendar Days Teachers on each grade will meet at least 2 times per month to update maps and write lesson plans after reviewing student work. Administrators, and Teachers Administrators, All teachers in grades 3-5. ENL Teachers and Service Providers. 2018-19 CEP 18  OPTIONS FOR COMPREHENSION:  Activate Background Knowledge  Highlight Big Ideas: graphic organizers, highlighting, etc. 2.Provide Multiple Means of Action and Expression:  Assistive technologies  Use multi-media for communication: drawing, illustration, music, dance, video, visual art, dramatic arts  Build fluency with graduated levels of support:  Guide appropriate goal setting: Provide prompts and scaffolds, provide guides, checklists, and examples 3. Provide Multiple Means of Engagement:  Optimize individual choice and autonomy: Provide learners with as much discretion and autonomy by providing things such as: tools used for info gathering, the color, design, and graphics of layout, timing of completion of task  Minimize threats and distractions: Create accepting and supportive classroom environment, vary the level of risk, vary the level of sensory stimulation, involve all students in whole class discussion.  Provide options for self-assessment and reflection: Provide multiple models for self-assessment: charts, templates,feedback displays that support understanding in a timely manner In September all students in grades 3-5 will be given an I-Ready Benchmark Assessment in Reading. Administrators, Teachers and Staff Developers. 2018-19 CEP 19  After analyzing the data, it is evident that students with disabilities do not make sufficient progress on state ELA exams. For the 2018-2019 school year, PS 54 will continue to be a Teacher's College Partnership school and will use the Units of Study for Reading and Writing. This program allows ample time for independent reading and allows teachers to teach students at their "just right" level as well as improve their own pedagogy. Professional Development around the Teacher's College Units of Study and the incorporation of Learning Intentions, Success Criteria, Formative Assessment, Feedback Strategies and Universal Design For Learning will be ongoing throughout the school year. Teachers will engage in Evidence Walks to view best practices with one another. All teachers will continue to write Standards Based Learning Intentions and Success Criteria in ELA and Math. All Students in Grades 3-5. Students in Focus Group will be tracked. Focus Group and Students with Disabilities All Teachers and Students. Sept. 2018 This is done on a daily basis from Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Teachers 2018-19 CEP 20  Administrators, Teachers All students will benefit from this work. Sept. 2018 – June 2019 **PD will also be administered around the Danielson observations. Sept: Refresher on writing standards based Learning Intention and Success Criteria. Oct & Nov: Impact Team; Looking at Student Work and Calibrating Protocol. Dec. & Jan. PD will be implemented around findings from Cycle One and two Danielson Observations. Feb/March - Test Taking as a genre. April-June - PD based around needs noted after observations. Sept. 2018 – June 2019 2018-19 CEP 21  Our established Vertical Impact Team will lead Professional Development cycles around the book, The Empowered Learner - Student -Centered Assessment Toolkit by Paul Bloomberg twice a month during Professional Development on Monday afternoons. The end result of this book study will be that all students can chart their progress and mastery toward learning goals that are based on standards. All teachers Teachers will use Grade Meetings and common prep time to continue to adjust their curriculum maps based on the needs of the students. This is done on an as-needed basis, at least 2x per month. Administration attends all grade meetings. PD will be provided if there is a specific need. Sept. 2018 – June 2019. See below for specific Professional Development: Grades will work independently with the Vertical Team Leader as they study this book, as it must be used in conjunction with their ELA pacing guide. They will meet on an as-needed basis, at least on Administrators., Vertical Impact Team 2018-19 CEP 22  Our Parent Coordinator and selected teachers will conduct parent workshops once a month around academic areas in ELA , Math and Science during parent engagement. These workshops will highlight the High Expectations we hold for all of our students and will make parents aware of our rigorous curriculum. Parents Administrators and teachers will engage in Evidence Walks to learn best practice and improve their pedagogy by celebrating the work of their colleagues. Parents are invited to celebrate student success such as Publishing Parties, Concerts and Art Galleries. Administrators, teachers, parents and students. Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Selected Teachers. Administrators, Teachers, Parent Coordinator. Oct. 9 - Initial Parent Meeting. Overview of the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Program. Nov.13 - Algebra For All Meeting. Grade 5 math teachers. Jan. 15 - STEM Science Program. Feb. 12 - Test Taking Strategies in ELA. March 12 - Test Taking Strategies in Math. April 9 - Overview of the fourth grade science exam. May 14 - Activities and strategies to avoid the "Summer Slide." October 2018 – June 2019. Through thoughtful observations, administrators will identify teachers who have best 2018-19 CEP 23  practices. Monthly Instructional walks will be scheduled in those classrooms to highlight best practices. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the Parent Teacher Conference in September 2018, an overview of Core Collaborative and the Teacher's College Reading and Writing program will be given to parents. In conjunction with our Parent Coordinator, each grade will hold workshops around Teacher's College to give parents a more "in depth" look into how effective this program is in educating the students in ELA. Parents will also be given strategies to support and enrich their child(ren) in ELA while at home. During this time parents will be encouraged to ask any and all questions they may have about ELA, homework, assessment/testing, etc. These workshops will be given by all classroom teachers in October, January and March during Parent-Engagement Tuesdays. In addition, our teachers use the school website and the app "Remind" to communicate with parents and to inform them about the instruction going on in the classroom. Teachers include suggested activities and tasks parents can do at home with their child(ren)to increase student learning and close the achievement gap. Also, our Parent Coordinator, along with teachers volunteer their time to present fun Read-Aloud events for students and their parents. Each night is centered around a theme or particular book, followed by an activity directly related to the story. Parents and students benefit because they are engaged together aroung a book. It shows how much fun reading can be. It encourages parents to read more to their child at home, which is a proven indicator of reading success. Also, parents see first hand how to make stories come alive and they observe high level questioning tecniques at the same time. These nights are held in October and in April/May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Needed to implement this action plan are as follows: ● Ongoing Professional Development around The Teacher's College Units of Study from the Teacher's College Staff Developers. ● Our Field Support Center has invited our Impact Team to become "Impact Team Coaches" and is providing professional development under the Guiding Coalition. ● Utilizing Professional Development funds to afford teachers time to continue to work on revising their existing Curriculum Maps in all subject areas. 2018-19 CEP 24  ● Scheduling teachers to plan and work with the Parent Coordinator to develop workshops for parents that take place on Tuesday afternoons during Parent Engagement. ● Scheduling Evidence Walks for teachers to observe best practices. ● Saturday Academy will be held during February and March to provide Test Preparation in ELA and Math for students in Grades 3-5. This Academy will be funded through school funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, students our focus group students in grades 4,5 will score at a level 3 on the I-Ready Benchmark Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) I-Ready Benchmark Assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1.According to the 2017-2018 New York City School Framework for Great Schools, PS 54 received 88% in the area of Social-Emotional Support. That is three percent lower than the Citywide Responses. Our school's strength relative to this Capacity Framework is that we have a program in place to raise the percentage of of Social-Emotional Support. We are a, "Fill Your Bucket School." This program is based on the book, Have You Filled A Bucket Today. Students are taught to be "bucket fillers" by being kind to others as opposed to "bucket dippers," where they are unkind to others. Each day, our staff consciously looks for students who do nice things for one another. When these students are identified, they are asked to share their kind act during morning announcements. We also implemented a "Bucket Filler of the Month," whereby each month a student from each class is honored at our assembly for being a bucket filler. The student receives a certificate and small silver bucket filled with treats. To further increase social-emotional support throughout PS 54, we are going to continue to implement Sanford Harmony. This program builds student self esteem through read aloud books and games. Three teachers and two paraprofessionals have received a full day of training and will turnkey this training to the staff. 2. During the 2017-2018 school year, we implemented an Advisory Group for fifth grade students, whereby key people in the school (fifth grade teachers, social workers, male gym teacher and guidance counselors) took groups of students and worked on social-emotional issues such as self-esteem and bullying. Students at this age are often dealing with many physical changes due to puberty and don't always have the tools to deal with theses changes and new emotions and sensitivities. We want each student in our school to be able to identify with one adult that they can go to if there is a problem or an issue. We received positive feedback from the children and adults involved in the program. We are going to continue to implement this program during the 2018-2019 school year. Our need to implement the above programs is budgetary. To fully implement the Fill Your Bucket Program, requires many read aloud books, buckets (one for each child) and professional development. Our advisory program also requires us to provide coverage to staff involved in this program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 26  By June 2019, P.S. 54 would like to see a decrease in the number of occurrences in our high frequency areas of the lunchroom and schoolyard by 40% as reported in OORS compared to the 2017-2018 school year. This will have a great and positive impact on our school's culture . 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan We are going to continue to implement, "Fill Your Bucket" program. This program is based on the book, Have You Filled Your Bucket Today? This program promotes kindness, compassion and fairness. Students are taught to be "Bucket Fillers" not "Bucket Dippers." This program promotes a positive environment throughout the school. Each morning, a positive Morning Message will be posted on the front bulletin board in the main lobby. Teachers will emphasize the importance of the message and ways the students can carry it out. Pictures of students and school activities will accompany the message when possible. In addition to Student of the Month, teachers will select two student who will be honored for "Bucket Fillers of the Month." Students This program is promoted on a daily basis with a monthly "Bucket Filler of the Month" assembly where 1 student from each class is awarded and spotlighted in front of an audience of peers, parents, and staff. September 2018 - June 2019 Monthly Administration, All Staff and Students 2018-19 CEP 28  These students will be recognized for their kindness and compassion for their peers. They will be give an certificate and a small bucket filled with pencils, erasers, etc., at our monthly assembly. Sanford Harmony, an anti-bullying and self-esteem program will be implemented in all classrooms from Pre-K to Grade Five. Students will learn how to handle difficult situations through games and key read aloud books. P.S. 54 will also continue to implement "Terrific Tickets" incentive program. Brightly colored tickets, resembling carnival tickets, have been purchased for the school. Each month different colored tickets will be distributed to the classes based on their overall behavior in areas such as the cafeteria, hallways, school yard, and common areas. Administration, cluster teachers, service providers, and school aides have been given tickets to distribute when they catch a class doing the right thing, such as, lining up quietly and cleaning their area. During the month, we hold a "Stop and Count." The medial Stop and Count, affords the winning class in the school an extra incentive prize such as a free gym period or special snack. The 100% Attendance tickets help classes reach this goal. At the end of each month, the class that has the most tickets, receives a pretzel or ice cream party from our PTA. Students October 2018 - June 2019 Students September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Students Administration, Students, Teachers Administration, Students, Teachers and Parents Administration, Teachers, Students, Sanford Harmony Leaders 2018-19 CEP 29  Also, this year "Sportsmanship" is being highlighted in Physical Education. A Sportsmanship Code will be hung in the gym. Students will become familiar with the code and asked to sign a banner with the code on it. SWD's and ELL's (we do not have any SIFE or STH students) are included in all activities and earn tickets and rewards in all programs and activities. Adjustments and modifications as to the observable behavioral expectations needed to receive tickets,etc., are modified according to a student's IEP or any language barrier. The ENL teacher and Parent Coordinator assists with explaining the program(s) to the students. Sept 2018-June 2019 Sportsmanship will be a part of daily PE lessons and vocabulary Sept 2018- June 2019 Program implemented on a daily basis. Students Students Students Admin, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, PTA 2018-19 CEP 30  Two teachers are coordinators of our Student Leader Program. Student Leaders complete an application to be considered for the position. When selecting Student Leaders, we do select several Students With Disabilities and English as a New Language Learner. Part of the responsibilities of Student Leaders is to craft a daily morning announcement. This announcement encourages good attendance.Giving the students this responsibility helps their self esteem and leadership skills. Students Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Activities: Teacher Leader Coordinators,, Administration Sept. 9Student Leaders are selected. Overview is given. Oct. Student Leaders will participate in Halloween celebrations. Nov. - Thanksgiving Feast Dec. - Winter Concert Jan - Evening with Teddy 2018-19 CEP 31 Feb.- Bugs and kisses Mar. - Shamrock Dance April - Bunny Tales May - Spring Concert At our first PTA Meeting, an overview of the "Fill Your Bucket" and "The Sanford Harmony"program will be given to all parents. During the school year, we have "Bucket Filler of the Month" at each Student of the Month Assembly. Our Parent Coordinator will also give an overview of the "Fill Your Bucket" program during Parent Engagement in late September. Parents Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Teachers Bucket Filler Workshop Parent Coordinator, Administration Parents In order to provide oversight of these initiatives, we will do a data analysis of the OORS report on a monthly basis. Admin Admin Sept 2018-June2019 on a monthly basis Advance observation reports that include evaluation, feedback, and next steps related to components 2a (Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport) and 2d (Managing Student Behavior) will add to data to see if initiatives are having a positive effect on the school environment. 2018-19 CEP 32  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Curriculum Conference in September 2018 will outline our Fill Your Bucket Program and Sanford Harmony Program. Workshops throughout the school year during Parent Engagement will be given to further educate the parents regarding our initiative around Supportive Environment. Our parent coordinator arranges several workshops throughout the year. The JCC comes in to give a series of English language classes to parents. Cornell Medical Center comes in to give healthy cooking lessons to parents. These events are put in place according to the providers' schedules. Theme-based read-alouds are held in the evenings at least 2x/year (Spring/Fall), organized and presented by the parent coordinator and teachers. In addition, our teachers and staff members are in constant communication with parents/guardians through technology based initiatives: Remind, Twitter, and the school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to implement this action plan, we plan to utilize all the human resources in our school. Students, all teachers (classroom, content specialists, speech), OT/PT therapists, secretaries, aides, custodial staff, kitchen staff, security, administration, and parents. We will all lead by example. Some will have different responsibilities (ie. giving out tickets, holding assemblies, etc.), but it is an inclusive program of which we are all stakeholders. The school schedule will be adjusted slightly each month in order to accommodate the presentation of awards at the assemblies. This program takes place during the school day. If any after school time is needed to implement this program, it is usually done on a volunteer basis. However, per session would be paid if ever necessary. PTA will fund prizes for winners of monthly Terrific Tickets. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, PS 54 will have a 20% decrease in the number of occurrences in our high frequency areas of the lunchroom and the schoolyard as reported in OORS compared to the 2017-2018 school year.. . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data and reports that are generated from the Online Occurrence Report System. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  2018-19 CEP 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to the New York City School Survey Framework for Great Schools Report, we found that one of our school's strengths relative to this framework is that we have made progress in the Collaborative Teachers element. The data reports that 79% of the teachers felt that they would try new ideas that were presented in professional development strategies. We feel that his number is too low. It is 6% below the district average. We would like more of teachers to take the risk and try new ideas that are presented in our ongoing professional development. Administration also uses data obtained from Danielson Observations to collect data on teachers trying out new strategies presented in workshops. This topic is also discussed at teacher team meetings (with and without admin. present) and concerns are recorded and shared. 2. We have a Vertical Impact Team in place which inspires positive change and efficacy in the building. This team attends professional development offered by our Field Support Center and brings back ideas around novel ways to strengthen our work around feedback and encouraging our students to become Assessment Capable Learners. This team also surveys the teachers regarding any professional development they may want or need. These requests are given to the administration and collaboratively, professional development workshops are planned. We also support class inter-visitation so teachers can see first-hand their colleagues implementing new strategies presented in workshops. Another of PS 54's need relative to this Capacity Framework is timing. For the 2018-2019 school year, administration will also work with the teachers on deepening the work around Core Collaborative. We will focus on student driven Success Criteria, Teacher Clarity, better teacher understanding of the standards and self and peer assessment. We will also continue deepening our strong partnership with Teacher's College, as we are a partner school. These measures should support the teachers by scaffolding the learning of their own practice, thereby giving them the confidence to take risks and try new strategies in their classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 35  By June 2019, 85% of the teaching staff will implemented the following protocols from Paul Bloomberg: Calibration, Looking at Student Work, Lesson Study, Micro-teaching and Evidence Walks as facilitated by our Vertical Impact Team and administration. This refocused, deliberate professional development will result in 85% of the teachers scoring in the effective/highly effective range on the Danielson rubric in the areas of 1a, 1e, 3b, 3c, and 3d. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Thoughtful professional development will be given by our Vertical Impact Team. They will turnkey information they learned at the FSC and through the Guiding Coalition that is also offered by our FSC. Teachers, Impact Team Members Teachers Collaborative Team Teacher Meetings are held at least 2x/month where teachers analyze student data to determine how to proceed with best practices in their lesson planning. They discuss which strategies will promote higher student outcomes and close the achievement gap. They plan lessons together and update curriculum maps accordingly. Admin. attends 1 meeting per month. Sept. 2018 – June 2019. Core Collaborative Learning Sessions (offered by the borough)Additional days will be purchased through the school. PD given at least monthly on PD Monday and during teacher team meetings Sept 2018-June 2019 Mtgs held at least 2x/month Administration and Teachers Administration and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 37  Class inter-visitation is an integral strategy that impacts change at PS 54. Teachers who need need more support in implementing new strategies into their instruction observe their colleagues who have seen success (based on both formative and summative assessment) from using a particular strategy. PS 54 also became an official partner school with Teacher's College. This partnership affords us ten days of professional development in PS 54. The partnership also affords us 50 Calendar Days whereby the teachers can attend workshops at Teacher's College. We also purchased specialty days where workshops are offered on specific areas in reading and writing. Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 (Throughout the year on an as-needed basis). Sept. 2018 - June 2019. We will update when PD days are set by Teacher's College. (Fall 2018) UDL is included to address SWD's and ELL's: Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 1. Providing Multiple Means of Representation: OPTIONS FOR PERCEPTION: Offering ways of customizing the display: font size, graphs, contrast, color, etc alternatives for auditory information alternatives for visual information: provide text or spoken descriptions, physical objects, etc. OPTIONS FOR LANGUAGE: 1. Clarify vocabulary: Teachers UDL Strategies are done on a daily basis Administration, Teachers Administration, Teachers Administration and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 38   pre-teach, connect to learners experience, provide graphics Illustrate through multiple media  OPTIONS FOR COMPREHENSION:  Activate Background Knowledge  Highlight Big Ideas: graphic organizers, highlighting, etc. 2.Provide Multiple Means of Action and Expression:  Assistive technologies  Use multi-media for communication: drawing, illustration, music, dance, video, visual art, dramatic arts  Build fluencies with graduated levels of support:  Guide appropriate goal setting: Provide prompts and scaffolds, provide guides, checklists, and examples 3. Provide Multiple Means of Engagement:  Optimize individual choice and autonomy: Provide learners with as much discretion and autonomy by providing things such as: tools used for info gathering, the color, design, and graphics of layout, timing of completion of task  Minimize threats and distractions: Create accepting and supportive classroom environment, vary the level of risk, vary the level of sensory stimulation, involve all students in whole class discussion.  Provide options for self-assessment and reflection: Provide multiple models for self-assessment: charts, templates,feedback displays that support understanding in a timely manner School Leaders will monitor these initiatives by using the Advance system of evaluation, feedback, and professional support in the furtherance of this annual goal. 2018-19 CEP 39  Sept 2018-June 2019 (3x - 5x / week) Admin Administration In addition to The Core Collaborative, we will continue to design academic Toolkits for all learners. These Toolkits will support different entry points for all students. Students will be taught to use the Toolkits during ELA and Math and while they are working independently. Universal Design for Bottom 1/3 students. Students with disabilities, Sept. 2018 – June 2019. Teachers will be given PD around strategies that support struggling Administration 2018-19 CEP 40 Learning Strategies will also continue to be implemented to meet the needs of all learners. During Parent Engagement on Tuesday afternoons and at scheduled Parent Workshops, the Parent Coordinator in conjunction with Lead Teachers will conduct workshops to explain the work of Paul Bloomberg that is ongoing in all classrooms. These workshops will focus on Teacher Clarity, Success Criteria and how it is effectively implemented in the classrooms which will lead to an increase in scores on ELA and Math State Exams. learners in order to build their Toolkits. Intervisition will be arranged for teachers to observe classes that have working Toolkits. Parents Sept. 2018 – June 2019. Administration, Parent Coordinator Oct - Overview. Nov- Repeated Interactive Read Aloud. Dec - Learning Intention/Success Criteria Feb - continuum March - Test Taking Strategies. The activities that address the Capacity Framework Element of Trust will be evident by an increase in ratings of Effective and Highly Effective in Danielson Competencies 1e and 3c. Administration, Teachers. All teachers. Sept. 2018 – June 2019. Observations will be conducted throughout the school year by the Principal and Assistant Principal. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the Curriculum Conference of 2018, we will present our work around Core Collaborative and give a brief overview of Teacher's College Partnership. We will also ask our Vertical Impact Team to present their work to the parents. Then parents will proceed to the classroom for a more detailed "training" on TC and Core Collaborative, followed by a Q & A period. During the school year we will hold workshops during parent engagement around the above two topics to further the understanding of the above two programs. We plan to hold at least 4 meeting per year: September, November, February, and April. At these workshops parents will be provided with the necessary resources, bother paper and digital, to support their children at home. Throughout the year, all teachers will add information, tips, strategies, and answers to questions raised by parents onto their page of the school website. The Collaborative Teacher Teams can collect all these shared tips and strategies and develop a mini handbook for parents that also highlights some of the new strategies that the teachers are trying in classroom that parents can try at home 2018-19 CEP 41  with their children. These workshops and initiatives will be given by the vertical team and other classroom teachers with administrative oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Being part of the FSC Guiding Coalition, affords our Vertical Team to attend professional Development throughout the school year. Being part of this group will allow our team members the opportunity to network with other schools to share out best practices. Taking the information learned from the Guiding Coalition, members of our Vertical Team will be able to provide our own teachers with professional development during Monday afternoons. Substitute teachers will also be hired to give classroom teachers additional time for meeting to deepen their work around The Core Collaborative. We will use creative scheduling to free the teachers to complete Evidence Walks to highlight best practices including success Criteria and Formative Assessment. Visits to other schools will also be coordinated to further give teachers an opportunity to see ongoing best practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of Collaborative Teachers' focusing on planning and implementing new pedagogical techniques, at least 90% of teachers will receive at least 2 MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in components 1e (Designing Coherent Instruction) and 3c (Engaging Students in Learning), as measured by Advance observation reports between September 2018 and February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance observation reports will be the instrument of measure to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-2018 New York City Framework for Great Schools Survey indicates a need for more Program Coherence and Teacher Influence in PS 54. 80% of our teachers felt that PS 54 has strong Program Coherence. That is 5% lower than the citywide average and 7% lower than the district average. Teacher influence is 75% positive which is 5% lower than the district and city average. For the 2018-2019 school year PS 54 is not going to be a Partnership School for reading and writhing with Teacher's College due to funding. However, our teachers will continue to implement the Teacher's College philosophy with from last years partnership through the Teacher Leaders and administration to provide consistency in curriculum instruction and learning materials among teachers in the same grade as well as horizontal and vertical planning throughout the grades. This will help improve Program Coherence. PS 54's strengths to relative to this Capacity Framework is the ability of Teacher Teams to work together effectively. On our Principal's Performance Observation in May 2018, we yielded a grade of Highly Effective" around 4.2, Teacher Teams. We also have strong Impact Teams in place. These teams will only strengthen in the 2018-2019 school year, as our partnership with Core Collaborative continues. We are confident that our teachers will work collaboratively to implement Teacher' College Units of Study in reading and writing effectively. In addition administration is going to implement Instructional Cabinet Teams in ELA and Math to further give teaches a voice school wide decision making. PS 54's need relative to this capacity is budgetary. Although teachers work well collaboratively and use inter visitation to highlight best practices, it would be beneficial for PS 54 to have a literacy coach to help us implement this program into our school. The cost of Core Collaborative is also very expensive. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 90% of all teachers will receive end of year MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson Framework for Teaching, as measured by the 2018-2019 end of year MOTP ratings in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 43  Part 3a – Action Plan Our schoolwide focus for the 2018-2019 school year is to make our Partnership with Teacher's College successful through professional development from Teacher's College. All classroom teachers. September 2018 – June 2019. Administration, All teachers. Ongoing Professional Development. Ten "in-house" days for grades K-2 and 3-5. 50 Calendar Days were purchased where teachers can attend PD at Teacher's College on specific topics. Speciality groups were also purchased. Our Vertical Impact Team will attend Professional Development and will turnkey information to all teachers around feedback strategies and student-centered assessments Toolkits. School Leaders will attend grade meeting and look at student work along with classroom teachers. Collaborative discussion around TC strategies and pedagogy will be shared in order to nurture the professional growth of teachers. Teachers will attend one in-house workshop per month plus 50 days at TC according to schedule of specific topics. All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Vertical Impact Team At least 4x/year (Oct., Dec., Feb., April) Administration and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 44  In order to provide oversight, Learning walks will take place. Admin and teachers will debrief to further deepen the work around TC. Teachers will submit summative assessment data to school leaders in order to perform periodic data analysis of student progress. ENL teachers will "push-in" to classrooms during ELA instruction in order to address the needs of English Language Learners. Also, ENL teachers meet with all teachers to share best practices in addressing learning needs of ELL's. School Leaders will monitor these initiatives by using the Advance system of evaluation, feedback, and professional support in the furtherance of this annual goal. Teachers Teachers Teachers Classroom teachers, content specialists, and ENL teachers All teachers Sept-20180Sept 2019 (Once per month) Weekly Monthly As per the mandated ELA instruction. Admin Admin Admin Admin 2018-19 CEP 45  Admin and teachers Admin Sept. 2018-June 2019 They plan together weekly with classroom teachers and as needed with content specialists. Sept.2018-June 2019 (3x - 5x / week) 2018-19 CEP 46  Through this lens of rigor, we are going to continue to apply the Universal Design for Learning Principles to make learning accessible to all students. We are going to focus on our high-need student subgroups (All students in grades 3, 4, 5 that have IEP's .) Students in sub-groups Sept. 2018 – June 2019. Administration, Teachers PD around creating Toolkits with multiple entry points to foster independence will be given to the teachers. UDL strategies will be given on a need by need basis as identified through Danielson Observations. UDL is an initiative that has been implemented at PS 54 for the past three school years. September 2018 - June 2019. Monthly meetings. 2018-19 CEP 47  ELA and Math Instructional Leads will be continue to be implemented on all grade levels during the 2018-2019 school year. These teachers will act as the liaison between administration and their colleagues. This will provide vertical instructional coherence within the building. This will give teachers more of a "voice" in schoolwide decision making regarding curriculum. Continue to deepen work around our existing Vertical Impact Team, and create a Second Grade Impact Team. This will deepen the work around The Core Collaborative. We will continue to use the seven protocols from the Core Collaborative. Selected Teachers in all grades. Lead Teachers on Impact Team. On Tuesday, during Parent Engagement, Administration, the Parent Coordinator in conjunction with specific teachers, will offer workshops to help parents understand how our initiative of implementing Core Collabrative Strategies araise the level of engagement and rigor throughout the building. Parents September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Instructional Lead Members. Administration, Teachers Administration, Parent Coordinator, Teachers Sept. 2018 – June 2019. Sept: Introduction to Core Collaborative. (Learning Intention and Success Criteria) Oct - Nov: Introduction to Standards. Jan. - Overview of ELA exam. Feb - Overview of Math Exam. 2018-19 CEP 48 Feb - Test Taking Strategies April - Continuums The activities that address the Capacity Framework Element of Trust will be evident by an increase in parent attendance on Tuesday afternoons. Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Teachers Parents, Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed regarding our work around Core Collaborative and Teacher's College Partnership at our September 2018 Curriculum Conference and have workshops during parent engagement planned to further explain this work to our parents. Tuesday Afternoon has been set aside for Parent Engagement time in which the teachers have time to reach out to the parents. Each teacher in grades Pre-K through 5 is responsible for holding a Parent Workshop on how they can support their children at home in reading and math. These workshops will take place twice a year (Spring/Fall). The Physical Education teachers will hold a parent workshop for parents with children in Grades 4 and 5 to explain the puberty curriculum. Providing fun, safe, educational after school events for our students, parents, teachers, and staff members provides another level of engagement for the entire PS 54 family. Through these events, parents are able to learn different strategies and activities that can further support their child(ren) and home and strengthen the home-school connection. Our Parent-Coordinator along with teacher volunteers will be hosting at least 2 theme-based read-aloud events (Fall/Spring). Our 3 Physical Education teachers will host at least 2 "Family Fun Night" (Fall/Spring). Students will come to school with their grown-up and participate in aerobic-based activities including warm-up and cool-down flexibility moves. Through the work of our parent coordinator, the JCC, provides English classes to parents during the school day. This is very instrumental in helping our ELL's succeed in school, as their parents can better support them in ELA at home. These "outside-of-school" programs truly deliver social-emotional support that drives student achievement. The Parent Coordinator will be assisting the teachers with notices and translation services where needed. School leaders will be involved in the planning and implementation of all programs that promote parent and family engagement, and they will be on premises actively participating with students, parents, and teachers during all after school events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 49  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All staff members will be provided with the books, The Empowered Learner and Leading Impact Teams. Paul Bloomberg/Core Collaborative will be paid for through school funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 90% of all teachers will receive at least 2 ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in components 1a (Demonstrating knowledge of content and pedagogy) and 1e (Designing coherent instruction), as measured by Advance observation reports for the period of September 2018 to February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance observation reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 50  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, attendance at PTA Meetings was low. Please see below: September 13, 2017: 205 Parents (Curriculum Conference) October 24, 2017 - 13 Parents November 21, 2017 65 Parents (Student of the Month Assembly) December 19, 2017: Did not meet quarom January 23, 2017: 72 Parents (Student of the Month Assembly) February: No Meeting March 27, 2018: 10 parents April: 17 , 2018 - 17 parents May: 22, 2018 - 15 parents June 27, 2017 - 19 parents PS 54's strength relative to this Framework Capacity is that although attendance at PTA Meetings is low, our parents fully do participate in Family Fun Nights such as, Back to School Glow Dance, Sept. 2017 - (Filled to Capacity), Halloween Party for K-2 - October 2017- (Filled to Capacity). Holiday Concert K-2 - December 2017 (Filled to Capacity.) Disney Kids, "Wizard of Oz Production" - (Filled to Capacity) International Food Festival June 2018 (Filled to Capacity) We are working diligently to instill the belief that attendance at PTA Meetings will give parents a voice in the activities and initiatives that are implemented at our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 51  By June 2019, as a result of the presentation of student work and the showcasing of students' talent and achievement during 90% (9 out of10) PTA meetings, there will be a 50% increase of parent participation at monthly PTA meetings, as measured by parent sign-in sheets, compared to the parent sign-in sheets from the 2017 - 2018 school year. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  During the 2018 - 2019 school year, the School Leadership Team coordinated an "Interest Survey" which was distributed to the school community. Parents were interested in learning more about Common Core Learning Standards, ELA/Math Exams and Internet Safety. PS 54 will have presentations around these topics during PTA Meetings during the 2018-2019 school year. All students (inclusive of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities) will have an opportunity to have their work showcased at selected PTA Meetings. Our Content Specialists in The Arts will be responsible for coordinating a student presentation at selected monthly PTA Meetings. This responsibility was detailed in the specific posting. Our Physical Education Teachers will present an overview of the Health Curriculum at a monthly PTA Meeting. Administration, Teachers in conjunction with Content Specialists. PTA, Adminisration Parents and Guardians. Sept. 2018 – June 2019: Sept. 2018 - Meeting will be held in conjunction with Curriculum Night. We will review the Common Core Learning Standards and our Promotional Policy with the parents as well as introduce our staff and content specialists. Oct. 2018 - Health Curriculum given by our Physical Education Teachers 2018-19 CEP 53  Nov. 2018 - Student/Bucket Filler of the Month grades K-1 December - 2018 - No meeting January 2019 - Overview of the ELA Exam February 2019 - An expert on internet safety is scheduled to speak to PTA and Parents about Internet Safety. March 2019 - Music and Art Celebration hosted by Music and Art Content Specialists April 2019 and May 2019 - PTA Elections. June 2019 - Student/Bucket Filler of the 2018-19 CEP 54 Month - Grades 4 and 5. 2018-19 CEP 55  Student of the Month/Bucket Filler of the Month will be presented at two of the PTA Meetings to encourage more parents attending these meetings. Parents, Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Teachers, PTA The activities that address the Capacity Framework Element of Trust will be evident by an increase in parent attendance at PTA Meetings. Parents ( 1 in Fall, and 1 in Spring) November 2018– June 2019 Administration, Teachers, PTA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Music, Art Content Specialists will work with students to prepare them to perform at a PTA Meeting. Substitute Teachers will be hired if time is needed for students to practice for events. Physical Education Teachers will be given necessary time to prepare for Health and Wellness workshop for parents. PTA will meet with Administration to review needs assessment to determine best partnerships to meet the needs of parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 56  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of the presentation of student work and the showcasing of students' talent and achievement during 80% of the PTA meetings, there will be a 30% increase of parent participation at monthly PTA meetings as measured by the parent sign in sheets, compared to the parents sign sheets from the previous year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance sign-in sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 57  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in grades 4-5 who scored a Level One on the 2018ELAExam. This is federal money that we get each year. All students in grades 3-5 are invited to Saturday Academy. Performance on Teacher’s College Reading Assessment – Running Records. (K-5) MOSL Performance - Grades K-2, using Running Records. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) AISGuided Reading in a small group. Test Preparation using Coach Series and New York Ready. AIS Guided Reading in the classroom. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group instruction. Students are grouped according to abilityand pulled out three times per week. Students are grouped according to ability. Large grouping, as all students areinvited and it is paid for by the school budget to give everyone the opportunity to partake in this program. Small group. During the school day. Saturdays beginning in February 2019 through April 2019. 8:00 a.m. - 11:00 a.m. 2018-19 CEP 58  English as a New Language Learners. Small Group. Small Group. AISGuided Reading in the classroom. Using LLIkits and guided reading. Mathematics Students in grades 4-5 who scored a Level One on the NYS2018 Math Exam. This is Federal Money that we receive each year. Small group instruction to work on areas of need as identified by the needs analysis of the NYSExam All students in grades 3-5 are invited to the Saturday Academy. Test Preparation using NYCCoach Series and NY -- I Ready During the school day. During the School Day. After School on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 2:35 p.m. -4:35 p.m., beginning in November 2018 and ending in May 2019. During the school day. Small group. Saturday Academy – Students are 2018-19 CEP 59  Scores on State Math Exam (Grades 4-5) AIS Small group within the classroom Critical Areas Exam and End of Chapter Exams from Go Math and scores on Exemplars. AISSmall Group within the classroom. grouped according to ability. Large group as everyone is invited to attend. Saturdays beginning February 2018 through April 2019. 8:00 a.m. - 11:00 a.m. Small group during the school day. Teachers group students according to ability during the school day. Small group during the day. Science Scores on state Reading and Math Exam. (grades 4-5) AIS small group guided reading with science texts. Small groups within the classroom. Teachers group students according to ability during the school day. During the school day. AIS will be provided by the classroom teacher and the science cluster teacher. During the school day. Science cluster teachers will also maintain guided reading groups. Small groups within the classroom. Social Studies cluster teachers will also maintain guided reading groups within the cluster. AIS will be provided by the classroom teacher and by the social studies cluster teacher. Individual, small group counseling. During the school day. Scores on Science State Exam. (grade 5) Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Classroom tests. Scores on state Reading and Math Exams. (grades 4-5) Scores on Social Studies Classroom Exams. Observation of students. Students are discussed at bi-weeklyPPTMeetings. Recommendations from classroom teacher. AIS small group guided reading wit science texts. At risk counseling by guidance counselor and social worker. 2018-19 CEP 60  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 61  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 62  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 CEP 63  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Preschool children are transitioned to the elementary school program in the following ways:  ELA: our Pre-K students are introduced to many early learning concepts. They are taught letter recognition and sound recognition. They are also taught sight words. Each student has a subscription to Scholastic Magazine. Students engage in reading aloud with the teacher each week. This is a supplement to our early reading program. Handwriting is also taught in our Pre-K program through Handwriting Without Tears Program. Story time is embedded into the curriculum. Teachers ask questions on all levels of the DOK during and after stories are read. Kindergarten routines such as, Turn and Talk, Accountable Talk and Text Based Evidence are introduced in our Pre-K program.  Math: Through a hands-on approach using manipulatives, students are introduced to early math problem solving skills. Number recognition, counting and early problem solving are introduced in our Pre-K program.  Our Pre-K students are invited into the kindergarten classes for special occasions such as Book of the Month, math sharing, publishing parties and dramatic plays. Our Pre-K teachers also engage in intervisitations to make them aware of the demands of the kindergarten curriculum.  Parent Involvement: Pre-K parents are invited to a “Welcoming Tea” in early June to acquaint them with the PS 54’s kindergarten program. The Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Nurse, Special Education Providers and Speech Providers speak to the parents. Parents are also taken on a tour of the kindergarten classes to observe classes in session. They are also taken on a tour of our building. Professional Development for the teachers include: Atending Calendar Days at Teacher's College that pertain to Pre-K startegies Ability to meet with the TC Staff Developers to deepen their pedogogy. A “Sneak Peek” is scheduled for the day before kindergarten classes begin. Parents and students are invited into their kindergarten class for one hour. They meet their teacher and fellow classmates. They see their name on their new desk and get a feeling of “belonging.” This sneak peek lessens anxiety on the first day of school for both students and parents. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. After examining several instruments that assess independent reading levels, PS 54 teachers elected to use Teacher’s College Running Records as their form of assessment. On Demand Pieces in writing are given prior to each unit. Students are taken through the writing process to perfect their work. They also use the writing continuum and progressions to self assess their work. Go Math Performance Base Assessments and end of unit tests are used to assess students in math skills and problem solving skills. Math Exemplar problem solving is also used as a form of assessment in K-5 classrooms and cluster areas. 2018-19 CEP 64  Teachers also selected MOSL Running Records as a form of assessment. They believe that these running records give a detailed report of the student's reading abilities. Teachers meet with Administration to discuss the curriculum and assessments throughout the school year. Writing assessments are given to the Principal after each Units of Study. Math Performance Based Assessments are reviewed by the Assistant Principal. Through this practice, the administrators are kept abreast of the validity of the assessments and value the views of the teachers regarding any assessments that are selected. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 0 212,312.00 Title III, Part A Federal 11,200.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,642,338.00 X X X X MeetingSuccess after school of English Language Learners. Beginning November 2017 through April 2018. AfterschoolProgram, Rising Stars. Beginning January 2018 through May 20178 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 65  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 66   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 67  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 54, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 54 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; During Parent Engagement on Tuesday afternoons., parents are invited to meet with teachers to discuss student achievement and concerns. During this time, our Parent Coordinator in conjunction with selected PS 54 teachers and administrators present workshops on various educational topics that are listed below. For the 2017-2018 school year, emphasis is going to be placed on holding workshops around Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project, as we will become an official partner of Teacher's College during the upcoming school year. Parents will be given an introduction to the philosophy of Teacher's College and will be given an in depth orientation into how Teacher's College Reading and Writing will be implemented into the classrooms. Since independent reading, especially reading authentic literature is highlighted in this program, emphasis will be placed on the importance of nightly independent reading. Parents will be educated on the importance of reading "just right" books, which will ultimately help the students move through levels. 2018-19 CEP 68  In these workshops, parents will also be educated regarding the Common Core Learning Standards and will be given the tools and support to help their child meet Common Core Learning Standards. We will stress the importance of helping their children at home and will will give them the support they need to help their children succeed in school. For the 2017-2018 school year, we will continue to link our Book of the Month to Parent Engagement. At the September, December and May, Parent Coordinator, will hold a "hands on" workshop around the Book of the Month. Children and parents are encouraged to attend. Parent workshops for the 2017 – 2018 school year are as follows:  September Book of the Month Parent and Child Activity ● Overview of our Teacher's College Units of Study Reading and Writing Program - Each Tuesday afternoon, grades will present an overview of their pacing calendars. ● Overview of Core Collaborative ● How to effectively help your child with homework ● Overview of our Go Math Program ● Workshop around our Exemplar Math Program ● Overview of MyOn Reading Program and News Program that was purchased for PS 54. ● Overview of the “Hear Say” Program which is used to build student listening skills. (Speech Teacher) ● Embracing Early Emergent Reading and Writing Skills ● How the Arts Can Enhance Listening, Speaking, Reading, Writing and Problem Solving ● How Technology can be used to improve reading and math skills. (Technology Workshop) ● How is PS 54 embracing STEAM ● Test Preparation Overview – ELA and Math  Puberty Workshop ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; In order to provide parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making, we encourage the following outreach activities: ● Encourage attendance at PTA Meetings . To boost attendance at PTA Meetings we scheduled five PTA Meetings during the day and five meetings during the evening to accommodate all parents. The Administration informs parents of new programs and initiatives at the monthly PTA Meetings. Content Specialists will work with students to showcase music, art and drama which will be presented at PTA Meetings. 2018-19 CEP 69  ● Our Website, PS 54 Ladybugs is a direct link between the home and school. Teachers post Class News and Homework on the website. Teachers also communicate with the parents through this website. ● Parent representatives on the School Leadership Team play an active role in school-wide decision making. Parents who do not currently serve on the team are always invited to attend SLT Meetings as guests. ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Parents are given a Parent Handbook in September which outlines school policies and procedures. ● Blackbox , our school wide phone system is used consistently throughout the year to inform parents of meetings, special events and important news that impacts the school day. Teachers also have REMIND implemented. This is a texting system that enables classroom teachers to keep parents abreast of ongoing classroom activities. ● Parents are invited to attend our Parent Engagement Workshops in the School Library on Tuesday afternoons. ● Parents are aware that they can meet with their child’s teacher during Parent Engagement time on Tuesday afternoon. ● Teachers consistently communicate with parents during Parent Engagement on Tuesday afternoons. ● The school website, PS 54 Ladybugs , fosters a partnership between school and home through interactive communication. ● Home School correspondence folders which go home daily are maintained for every child in our school. ● Our Parent Coordinator works diligently with our ESL Parents to keep them abreast of all ongoing school activities. She works with administration to translate all documents into students’ native language. She also coordinates ESL classes for parents through The Jewish Community Center on Manor Road in Staten Island. ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; In an effort to provide assistant to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments, the following workshops and activities are scheduled: ● Common Core Learning Standards workshops are presented in English Language Arts and Math ● The Parent Coordinator facilitates meetings with the parents and helps them to understand the assessments and the results of the assessments. ● Teachers inform parents of assessment data with the distribution of Unit Test Results, Performance Based Assessment Results and Monitoring for Results reading assessments. Meetings are scheduled throughout the school year to support parents’ understanding of this data. ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● Notices are sent home in all languages. Our ESL Teacher send all parents of ELL students a Preferred Home Language Survey which is then maintained throughout the school year. 2018-19 CEP 70  ● We elicit the assistance of our staff in translation services. As a result, we have a list of translators available at the school at all times. ● DOE Translator Service (NYC Translation and Interpretation Unit) is utilized for school meetings and three way home phone calls are coordinated. ● Our School Leadership Team, consisting of PTA members and parent representatives work in close collaboration with school administration in all matters of instruction. SLT parents share information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities with parents at PTA Meetings and PTA sponsored events. ● Our full time trilingual Parent Coordinator communicates regularly with parents concerning all matters of school and parent related issues. ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; ● Tuesday Afternoons is designated as Parent Engagement Time. Our library is opened and administration and staff hold workshops for parents on selected Tuesday afternoons on various academic topics. ● Our Parent Coordinator has established a connection with Cornell Medical Center. A representative from Cornell meets with our ESL parents twice a month to discuss healthy eating selections. She also coordinates trips to the supermarket with the ESL Parents to help them make good choices when food shopping.  Our Parent Coordinator has also established a class for adult English Language Learners through the Jewish Community Center on Manor Road in Staten Island. This class meets twice a week and the participants learn English from a certified teacher from the Jewish Community Center. ● Disney Musical Theater, our afterschool self sustaining program affords parents the opportunity to work with their children and teachers in order to produce a spring musical. ● Parents will be re- introduced to our two new programs, Bucket Fillers and Sanford Harmony. These are two programs we will be continued in the 2017-2018 school year to build self-esteem amongst students. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 2018-19 CEP 71  ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● PS 54 will hold a Title One Meeting in November which will give parents an overview of the Title One Program. We have a Title One representative who attends meetings throughout the school year. ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; At the Title One Meeting and the School Leadership Team Meetings, we will collaboratively discuss where the Title One Money should be used to benefit all students at PS 54. ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; For the 2017-2018 school year, we are continuing to implement "Be a Bucket Filler" and the Sanford Harmony Program to build self esteem and student harmony throughout the school year. We will use Title One Funds to help implement this program. Parents will receive an overview of both programs at the beginning of the school year. The progress of the programs will also be discussed at PTA Meeting to keep parents abreast of progress. Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; The School Leadership Team in addition to all other members of the school community are invited to attend workshops on Bucket Filling, Respect for All, and NYC Department of Education Discipline Code. These teams also play an important part in the implementation of our social/emotional programs. ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; PS 54’s trilingual Parent Coordinator maintains solid relationships with parents. She conducts needs surveys to determine workshops that are of interest to the parents. Working collaboratively with Administration, the Parent Coordinator ensures that the workshops are delivered. She also coordinates monthly Family Fun Nights throughout the school year. The Parent Coordinator maintains logs and photographs of each event that is held. ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● The following workshops will be scheduled during the 2017-2018 school year: Academic Workshops Overview of Teacher's College Units of Study Reading Program - Each Tuesday during Parent Engagement, one grade will give an overview of the Reading and Writing Program. Emphasis will be placed on the pacing and the Independent Reading component of the program. 2018-19 CEP 72  Overview of Core Collaborative Go Math Workshop Overview of Exemplar Math Program that is used in addition to Go Math Overview around the Common Core Learning Standards Have You Filled Your Bucket Workshop/Sanford Harmony Workshop How Parents Can Become Effective Read Aloud Partners How to effectively help your child with homework MYON Workshop –computer based reading program – Refresher for previously logged in parents. New workshop for first time users. Overview of our new STEAM program Overview of the “Hear Say” Program which is used to build student listening skills. Embracing Early Emergent Reading and Writing Skills How the Arts Can Enhance Listening, Speaking Reading, Writing and Problem Solving How Technology can be used to improve reading and math skills in children. Test Preparation and The Common Core Overview – ELA and Math ● Community Outreach Events/Family Fun Nights. Glow in the Dark – Back to School Party Grades 3-5 (September 2017) Spook and Read (October 2017) Pumpkin Patch (October 2017) Halloween Parade (October 2017) Spooky Movie Night for Fifth Graders (October 2017) Halloween Party - Grades Pre-K - 2 (October 2017) Decorate a Bucket Workshop in conjunction with Book of the Month, Have You Filled Your Bucket Today? (September 2017) Thanksgiving Craft/Letters to Soldiers in conjunction with book of the month, A Day of Great Thanks (October 2017) This event will be followed by our International Thanksgiving Feast Winter Concert PK-1 (December 2017) 2018-19 CEP 73  Bugs and Kisses Dance Pre-K and K (February 2018) Science Family Fun Night (STEAM) (March 2018) Spring Concert Grades K-2 (Spring 2018) Talent Show Grades 3-5 (Spring 2018) Disney Kids Performance (Spring 2018) In addition to the above Family Fun NIghts, we will have a Family Fun Fitness Night in our gym conducted by our three Physical Education Teachers. November 2017 - Family Fitness NIght for Pre-K and K December 2017- Family Fitness NIght for Grade 1 and 2. (These will be held on different nights) January 2018 - Family Fitness NIght for Grade 3 February 2108 - Fitness Challenge during February Break March 2018 - Family Fitness Night for Grade 4 April 2018 - Family Fitness Night for Grade 5 May 2018 - Mother/Daughter Fitness Night (Yoga, Zumba) June 2018 - Father/Son Fitness Night (Basketball, Baseball) ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; PS 54 conducts workshops for parents to help them understand the Accountability System (New York Schools Account) and the Common Core Learning Standards. The Assistant Principal meets with parents to further explain the standards and assessments. The School Survey and Report Cards are discussed at School Leadership and PTA Meetings. Information regarding our Snapshot is placed on our school website, PS 54 Ladybugs. ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; PS 54 will hold Title One Meeting in November 2017 which will give parents an overview of the Title One Program. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 2018-19 CEP 74  Workshops are held during the day and in the evening to accommodate all parents. Our Parent Coordinator reaches out to parents who cannot attend certain workshops and works with them on an individual basis. PTA Meetings are held both in the morning and evening to accommodate all parents. Parents are invited to attend our Parent Engagement Open Access Library on Tuesday afternoons. ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● To best service our non-English speaking parents, we utilize the Language Identification Guide, which is presented to non-English speaking parents so that they may find their language and identify it for us. ● Pedagogues and staff who may be called upon for interpretation as indicated in Part A, include: Mrs. Titolo (Italian and Spanish), Mrs. Rexach (Spanish), Mrs. Magliulo (Italian), Mrs. Rashwan and Ms. Doda (Arabic). Depending on the need, the ESL Teachers and any one of the above interpreters will assist the parents in all matters requiring interpretation such as during group and one-on-one meetings. This service is offered upon request when such services are necessary for parents to communicate with teachers, guidance counselors, the school nurse and/or other school staff regarding critical information about their child’s education. ● In addition, parents may choose to rely on an adult friend/companion or relative who is over 18 years of age for language and interpretation services. These individuals can serve as interpreters for school staff and parents during formal or informal meetings where student achievement and/or student conduct are discussed. This often occurs at Parent Teacher Conferences. ● If additional interpretation support is needed, we contact the Department of Education Interpretation services department for over the phone assistance. The number we use is: 718-752-7373. ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; We will hold Title I Meeting in November 2017 which will give parents an overview of the Title One Program. At that time we will discuss the workshops that are offered throughout the school year. A survey was conducted by the PTA to ascertain the needs and interests of parents. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; Classroom teachers will conduct a Curriculum Conference in September, 2017. At that time, the curriculum for each grade will be presented to the parents. ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year: November 2017 - Family Fitness NIght for Pre-K and K December 2017- Family Fitness NIght for Grade 1 and 2. (These will be held on different nights) 2018-19 CEP 75  January 2018 - Family Fitness NIght for Grade 3 February 2108 - Fitness Challenge during February Break March 2018 - Family Fitness Night for Grade 4 April 2018 - Family Fitness Night for Grade 5 May 2018 - Mother/Daughter Fitness Night (Yoga, Zumba) June 2018 - Father/Son Fitness Night (Basketball, Baseball) STEAM Family Fun Night (March 2018) Math Family Fun Night (May 2018) ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; Deliberately scheduling events involving students at PTA Meetings raises the level of attendance at these meetings. We schedule Color Guard, Concerts, Plays and Art Shows before and after PTA Meetings to increase attendance. ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Scheduled Family Events Include: Glow in the Dark – Back to School Party (September 2018) Parent Information Meeting around Puberty for students in grades 3-5 conducted by our Physical Education Teachers (September 2018) Spook and Read (October 2018) Pumpkin Patch (October 2018) Halloween Parade (October 2018) Spooky Movie Night for Fifth Graders - (October 2018) Bugs and Kisses Party (Pre-K and Kindergarten February 2018) STEAM Family Fun Night (March 2018) In addition to the above Family Fun NIghts, we will have a Family Fun Fitness Night in our gym conducted by our three Physical Education Teachers. November 2018 - Family Fitness NIght for Pre-K and K December 2018- Family Fitness NIght for Grade 1 and 2. (These will be held on different nights) January 2019 - Family Fitness NIght for Grade 3 2018-19 CEP 76  March 2019 - Family Fitness Night for Grade 4 April 2019 - Family Fitness Night for Grade 5 May 2019 - Mother/Daughter Fitness Night (Yoga, Zumba) June 2019 - Father/Son Fitness Night (Basketball, Baseball) ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; Our Parent Coordinator maintains a Bulletin Board which displays updated resources and events. She also maintains instructional resources including literature and tools that will assist parents as they work with their children. ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; We encourage parents to become trained Reading Volunteers and arrange workshops with the Staten Island Mental Health Society which provides PS 54 with trained Reading Volunteers four afternoons per week. We also encourage our parents to become involved in Artworks which is a program in connection with the Brooklyn Children’s Museum. ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; Report Cards are distributed to all grades in November and in March. School wide interim Progress Reports are distributed in January. Parents are notified of their child’s reading level after the child is assessed using the Teacher’s College Assessment. This assessment is completed in September, December, March and June. Teachers keep in constant contact with the parents during Parent Engagement on Tuesday afternoon from 2:20 p.m. – 3:40 p.m. Teachers use REMIND Communication system to keep parents abreast of ongoing activities within each class. ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; The PTA distributes a calendar of events each month. Our school website, www.PS54Ladybugs.org also gives information about the events in our school. Our phone system, Blackbox informs parents about upcoming events. ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Each student is given a red PS 54 Folder. This folder is taken home each night. Teachers distribute important notices to parents via this folder. Notices are sent to parents in their native languages. 2018-19 CEP 77  School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Public School 54 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● Teacher's College Units of Study: PS 54 officially became a Teacher's College Partner School for the 2017 - 2018 school year. This program is aligned to the CCLS and is implemented in grades K-5. This program is taught through The Workshop Model and allow ample time for independent reading and conferencing. In writing, students are asked to write standards based writing pieces through the writing workshop model. Students also use a writing continuum developed specifically for each standards based piece. This writing continuum allows them to self assess their writing. Students are made aware of their writing strengths and can identify areas for improvement. ● Go Math: This program is aligned with the CCLS and is implemented in Grades K-5. ● Math Exemplars: This program uses open ended material to engage students and help them to develop critical thinking and reasoning skills to solve real world problems. Each problem-solving task has been classroom tested and can be used for assessment, instruction and/or professional development. Rubrics and anchor papers are integral components of all our material. Pre-K - We are on the Create Track. We use Building Blocks Math and complete the Ten Inter-disciplinary units provided by NYC. PS 54 has embraced the work of Paul Bloomberg and the Core Collaborative. Teachers have unpacked the standards and all lessons are standards based. Teachers write standards based Learning Intentions and Success Criteria for all lessons. Student are also co-constructing Success Criteria with their teachers. Our involvement with the Core Collaborative work has also enabled teachers to add formative assessment during and after lessons to "keep a pulse" on student learning. Data from formative assessment is used to further drive and refine instruction. Through the work with Core Collaborative, teachers have created Continuums in writing whereby students peer and self assess. Peer and self assessment is also evident in math, science and social studies. PS 54 students know where they are in their learning and what they have to do to get to the next level. PS 54 teachers teach with clarity as a result of our work with the Core Collaborative and students are on their way to becoming "Assessment Capable Learners." Our work with Core Collaborative has also afforded PS 54 with the knowledge to form Impact Teams. Impact Teams are teams of teachers who work to better the progress of students. Each of these Impact Teams has its own protocol. These protocols keep the team organized. PS 54 has established Impact Teams around Looking At Student Work, Calibrating, Evidence Walks and Lesson Study. During the 2017-2018 school year, we are going to continue to work with Core Collaborative to help us establish additional Impact Teams. 2018-19 CEP 78  Science: PS 54’s science curriculum is based on the Next Generation Science Standards. Science instruction provides students with opportunities to interact directly with the natural world emphasizing a hands-on, inquiry based approach to learning. Instruction in Science at PS 54 is offered in the classroom as well as by two full time Science Content Specialists. STEM: This year, our Science Content Specialist is offering a STEM approach to learning which is through inquiry based learning. One Content Specialist is incorporating Explorervision into the curriculum. Both content specialists are working with the bottom third students on a 3D project. Social Studies: Based on the New York State Core Curriculum, the teaching of Social Studies includes explorations of history, geography, economics, government and civics. Students learn about the people, places, eras, and events that shape our world. Arts: The study of music and visual arts enriches student learning across the entire curriculum while developing students’ ability to express themselves, and builds skills and knowledge in a variety of forms. An integral part of arts instruction at PS 54 is aligned with the New York State Education Department’s Blueprint for the Arts. ● using academic learning time efficiently; The PS 54 school day is divided into seven academic periods. The literacy block is 90 minutes and the math block is 75 minutes. In both math and reading, students are grouped according to ability. The groups are flexible and change daily after formative assessment is done. Response to Intervention is given to students in all grades who do not meet grade level standards. ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Respect For All philosophy is evident throughout our school. Two teachers are designated as Respect for All liaisons and coordinate workshops, assemblies and activities for Respect For All. We are also going to introduce New York City's vision of Empathy, Excellence and Equality to our staff during the 2018-2019 school year. ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Teacher's College Units of Study and Go Math are the programs that are implemented in PS 54. These programs are aligned to the CCLS. Teachers meet during Professional Learning and create/add to/revise maps to ensure that t he CCLS are being met during classroom instruction. Our fifth grade is implementing Algebra For All this school year. During summer 2018, three of our fifth grade teachers are attending workshops around Algebra For All and are going to implement it in Fall 2018. This program also contains Professional Development by NTN, which will be implemented in Fall 2018. ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; Content Specialists attend Teacher Team Meetings to efficiently address the needs of their students. These teachers focus on each grade’s cycles and targets in their specific content area. Content Specialists attend Professional Learning within their instructional areas. ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 79  All PS 54 Teachers are Highly Qualified I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Parent-Teacher conferences are held in November and March. A Welcome Back Curriculum Night is held in September and Student led conferences are held in May. ● School-wide interim Progress Reports are distributed in January ● Parents are notified of their child’s independent reading level after Teacher’s College Assessment in September, December, March and June ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; For the 2018-2019 school year, PTA Meetings are continued to be alternate between the morning and evening. Five meetings are held during the evening and five are held in the morning. All parent workshops are held during the day and in the evening to accommodate all parents. ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; PS 54 provides each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services, with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. PS 54 has posted near the primary entrance to the school, a sign in each of the most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. In addition to these proteins, the availability of language and interpretation services is also posted on our PS 54 School Website and o the Parent Coordinator’s bulletin board. The PS 54 and DOE’s website provides information on each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; PS 54 determines within ten days of a student’s enrollment, the primary language spoken by the family, and if this language is not English, whether the parents require language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school staff. In accordance with this schedule: 2018-19 CEP 80  Our ESL teachers ensure that our ELL parents receive all pertinent correspondence in their native language, by referencing the Preferred Language Forms. These forms are sent home in the beginning of the school year and their return is monitored. Returned forms are kept on file in our ESL Office. Depending on the preferred language, all important correspondence is translated and sent home accordingly. PS 54 provides parents whose primary language is a covered language with the translation of any document that contains individual, student specific information regarding, but not limited to a student’s health, safety, legal or disciplinary matters and entitlement or placement in any special Education English Language Learner or non-standard academic program. We utilize the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for any written documentation for which translation is required and cannot be satisfied by the school staff. ● ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; NYC Schools Account is a parent online tool that enables parents to gain access to their child’s achievement on state test scores, enrollment history and attendance information. ● Our Parent Coordinator will conduct individual meetings with parents to assist them in navigating the NYC Schools Account. By sharing this academic information with parents, we believe that parents can become active partners in their child’s education. ● Parent Teacher Conferences are held in September, November, March and May. A progress report is distributed to all students in January. A curriculum meeting is held in September and a student led meeting is held in May. ● Parents correspond with teachers on a daily basis through our Ladybug website. ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; The Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact will be discussed at the SLT Meeting and at a well advertised PTA Meeting where the Parent Involvement Policy is distributed. Our phone system, Blackbox will alert the parents to the importance of this meeting. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; To best service our non-English speaking parents, we utilize the Language Identification Guide, which is presented to non-English speaking parents so that they may find their language and identify it for us. 2018-19 CEP 81  Pedagogues and staff who may be called upon for interpretation include: Mrs. Titolo (Italian, Spanish) Mrs. Rexach (Spanish) and Mrs. Magliulo (Italian). Depending on need, the ESL Teachers and any one of the above interpreters will assist the parents in all matters Parents may choose to rely on an adult friend/companion or relative for language and interpretation services. These individuals can serve as interpreters for school staff and parents during formal or informal meetings where student achievement and/or student conduct are discussed. This often occurs at Parent-Teacher conferences. If additional interpretation support is needed, we contact the Department of Education Interpretation services for over the phone assistance at 718-752-7373. ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; Each student maintains a red PS 54 folder. This folder is taken home each night. Teachers distribute important notices to parents via this folder with a return “tear-off” slip attached. Notices are sent to parents in their native languages. Teachers or the Parent Coordinator call parents who do not return the tear off slips to ensure they have received notification of upcoming events. Our Parent Coordinator reaches out to non-English speaking parents, as well as those who are non-responsive. Meetings and events are posted on our Ladybug website and are communicated through our Global Connect phone system. All teachers also use Remind as a means of communicating with parents via text mesages. ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; The Staten Island Mental Health Society trains parents to become Reading Volunteers. Parents who participate in this program have the opportunity to read with PS 54 students during lunch periods. Classroom celebrations such as Publishing Parties are scheduled throughout the school year. Parents are invited to participate in their children’s learning outcomes. The PTA invites parents to assist at all PTA functions throughout the school year. Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; In addition to Parent Teacher Conferences and Curriculum Conferences, activities for parents are scheduled during Parent Engagement time which is held on Tuesday afternoons from 2:20 p.m. – 3:40 p.m. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; Our school staff welcomes a close partnership of teachers and parents. Collaboration is always encouraged. Administrators, Parent Coordinator and Teachers at PS 54 maintain an Open Door Policy. We plan school-wide events 2018-19 CEP 82  with our parents in mind and always accommodate parents with special needs and/or situations. Our trilingual Parent Coordinator is always available to welcome visiting parents and service their needs. In the cases of potential conflict, most parents always seek a resolution at the school level. ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); The following academic workshops are offered for the parents of PS 54 students: Common Core Learning Standards in English Language Arts and Math, Standardized Test Workshop, Navigating the Special Education System, Go Math Overview, Math Exemplar Overview, Teacher's College Units of Study Overview, Family Science Night, Pre-K – What is Early Literacy and Pre-K – It is Not Just Play, MYON Reader Workshop, Algebra For All, Sanford Harmony Program, Bucket Filler Program, Promotional Policy. ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; The lines of communication are essential in advocating parental development of the PS 54 School Parental Involvement Plan. This will be achieved by utilizing the services of the Parent Coordinator, informing the parents of activities at PS 54 through our Blackbox Phone System, and posting notices announcing opportunities for parental involvement in school activities, functions and decision making processes. Notices of these opportunities will also be sent home with students with tear-off return attachments for the purpose of eliciting parental responses. The communication of the best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community is an ongoing process at PS 54. Communication issues are regularly presented, discussed and resolved during Faculty Conferences, PTA meetings and School Leadership Team Meetings. In addition, every parent receives a parent handbook in September. ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● In March 2018, our School Leadership Team created a survey for parents regarding specific topics they would like to have discussed at PTA Meetings. Popular results were: ELA/Math Test Preparation, Technology Workshops, Common Core Learning Standards and Special Education. These topics are infused into the Parent Workshops for the 2018-2019 school year. ● ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; This information is posted on the Parent Bulletin Board which is accessible to all parents. In addition, our Parent Coordinator and school administration relay this information to all parents whose conflict cannot be resolved at the school level. ● II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Making sure my child is on time and prepared everyday for school. School begins at 8:00 a.m. ● Monitoring attendance and ensuring that my child arrives to school on time. 2018-19 CEP 83  ● Following the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent ● Sending in a note indicating the reason for the child’s absence ● Talking with my child about his/her activities each day ● Scheduling daily homework time ● Providing an environment conducive for studying ● Checking the Ladybug Website daily. ● Making sure that homework is completed ● Returning all permission slips and forms in a timely way. ● Ensuring that my child comes to school rested by establishing a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age. ● Monitoring and setting limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games ● Promoting positive use of extracurricular time such as extended day opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time. ● Taking advantage of extracurricular activities within the community. Supporting my child’s learning by making education a priority in school by: ● Communicating with the classroom teacher via the PS 54 Website. ● Volunteering in my child’s classroom if called upon ● Participating as appropriate in decisions relating to my children’s education ● Participating in school activities on a regular basis. ● Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly: Reading all notices from the school or the school district, either received by my child or by mail and responding as appropriate. ● Reading together with my child every day. ● Providing my child with a Public Library card. ● Communicating positive values and character traits, such as respect, hard work and responsibility. ● Respecting the cultural differences of others. ● Helping my child accept consequences for negative behavior. ● Being aware of and following the rules and regulations of the school district. 2018-19 CEP 84  ● Supporting the school’s discipline policy. ● Expressing high expectations and offering praise and encouragement for achievement ● Checking and assisting my child in completing homework tasks when necessary. ● Reading to my child and/or discussing what my child is reading each day for a minimum of 20 minutes. ● Signing the student behavior contract. ● Signing all homework and reading logs. ● Encouraging my child to follow school rules and regulations, and discuss their impact with my child. ● Volunteering in my child’s school or assisting from my home as time permits. ● Participating as appropriate in the decisions relating to my child’s education. ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs. ● Staying informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district. ● Responding to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested. ● Reviewing the Standards with our children ● Contacting the teacher if a problem arises. Considering requests for services, (OT, PT, Speech, Academic Evaluations, Enrichment Activities, etc.) when addressed as needed. ● Becoming involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision of the Parent Involvement Policy and Compact. ● Participating in or requesting training offered by the school, district, central and/State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible. ● Taking part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serving to any extent possible on advisory groups, e.g. Title One Parent Committees and/or School or District Leadership Teams. ● Attend various workshops, meetings, and events held at PS 54. ● Refer to the Bulletin Board our Parent coordinator maintains containing opportunities for parents to partake in various training/learning opportunities ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. ● Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 85  ● Attend school every day and arrive on time ● Complete homework and submit all assignments on time. ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions. ● Show respect for myself, other people and school property. ● Try to resolve disagreements and/or conflicts peacefully. Be a Bucket Filler, not a Bucket Dipper. 2018-19 CEP 86  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 87  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 54 will implement an after school program entitled "Meeting Success" to provide additional support for our English Language Learners. This program will be taught by our two licensed ENL teachers and will provide our English Language Learners with additional support in reading, writing, listening and speaking. In addition to our two ENL teachers, two Special Education Teachers will also be employed to work alongside our ENL teacher as they work with students with disabilities. The special education teachers would be at the cost of Title III funds, as they are directly servicing ENL Students. Our Meeting Success Program specifically designed for students in grades kindergarten through five, will be held on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons from 2:30 p.m. - 4:30 p.m. One hour will be reserved for working with the program, Literacy for Life, an Orton Gillingham based methodology. The program uses the multi-disciplinary approach to reading, writing and spelling. It also supports sound symbol relationships, and translates into stronger decoding and encoding skills. This program will be used with our younger ENL students, kindergarten through second grade. Teachers have received extensive training in Orton Gillingham and use the philosophies in their training to foster meaningful and deliberate instruction for our English Language Learners. Our Meeting Success Program also encompasses learning for students in grade three through five. This program will also be held on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons from 2:30pm - 4:30 pm. Teachers will work individually with students, and work in small groups to strengthen these students in the areas of reading and writing. The teachers will also create a strong emphasis on vocabulary development through the various stories that they read within the group. The Meeting Success Programs will provide additional support to our English Language Learners who have not attained a score of proficiency on the NYSESLAT exam. According to the 2018 NYSESLAT data, Kindergarten student data is entering 1 student, emerging 1 student, transitioning 2 students, expanding 7 students, and no commanding students. First grade student data is entering 1 student, emerging 0 students, transitioning 0 students, expanding 9 students, and 2 commanding students. Second grade data is entering 0 students, emerging 1 student, transitioning 1 student, expanding 3 students, and 5 commanding students. Third grade student data is entering 0 students, emerging 0 students, transitioning 2 students, expanding 4 students, and 8 commanding students. Fourth grade student data is entering 0 students, emerging 0 students, transitioning 2 students, expanding 10 students, and 3 commanding students. Lastly, our fifth grade student data is entering 0 students, emerging 1 student, transitioning 1 student, expanding 4 students, and 4 commanding students . The goal of our program is twofold. PS 54 believes that with additional direct instruction our English Language Learners can achieve a score of "Commanding" on the 2019 NYSESLAT Exam and also demonstrate progress on the 2019 State ELA and Math exams. In this program, teachers will be certain to work with all entering students and track their progress and success. Data from our past ELA exam revealed that our English Language Learners are not making significant overall gains in English Language Arts. Our English Language Learners are also 2018-19 CEP 88  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information below the target range in Critical Analysis and Evaluation, Information and Understanding, and Literacy Responses and Expression. Subgroups and Grade Levels of Students to be Served: We are targeting all English Language Learners students in grades K-5. In addition former ELL's from K-5 will be invited to the program to offer them more support to encourage continued success. Our goal is to increase their test scores in the Spring 2019 ELA exam, and help them attain a level of "Commanding" on the 2019 NYSESLAT. Schedule and Duration Our Meeting Success Program is for students in grades kindergarten through fifth grade will meet on the following Wednesday and Thursday afternoons from 2:30 p.m - 4:30 p.m.: is as follows: Language of Instruction Our program will be conducted in the English language. . Trends in our school are showing that the languages of Urdu, Chinese, and Arabic are on the increase, as noted in registration data. Number and types of certified teachers We will have two certified ENL teachers working with the targeted students. We also have two Special Education Teachers who will work alongside the ENL teachers to support Students With Disabilities, as many of our ELLs also have an IEP and would greatly benefit from special education teaching techniques. We use the universal design for learning in order to scaffold standards in a way that meet each individual student's needs. As stated above, the special education teacher will be at the cost of the Title III program, as she is working solely with the ENL students. The ENL teachers will provide direct instruction to the students. The teachers will work in small groups based on student need and data from classroom assessments and assessments that will be given in this program. Types of materials We will be using books from Continental Press with the upper grade students in order to strengthen and meet the students reading and writing goals. In addition, the teachers will use the Leveled Literacy Instruction (LLI) kits to strengthen reading skills in small group. We will use Wilson materials and workbooks in order to support the multi-disciplinary instruction. These materials reinforce basic skills in reading, writing, and spelling. The material used in this program is different from the materials that are used during the school day. The material was developed specifically to work with ENL students. There will be a great deal of emphasis on vocabulary and reading comprehension. These are all supplemental and distinct from daily instruction. Records All teachers will conference with students and keep a record on reading and writing conferences in a notebook specifically designed for the Meeting Success Programs. Teachers will also complete running records at frequent intervals to assess student's success at independent reading. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 89  Part C: Professional Development  name of provider Begin description here: PS 54 believes that professional development is key to the success of our Title III ENL program. The teachers will engage in targeted professional development prior to beginning the Title III program. This professional development will stem from resources available from Continental Press, and well as material for the Orton Gillingham program. Our ENL Teachers attend many professional development sessions through the Office of English Language Learners throughout the school year. Our ENL teachers also discuss the information that they receive with the classroom teachers during Professional Development time on Monday afternoons or on common preparation periods. The Teacher's College Reading program will continue to be utilized, at no cost to Title III, and continued professional development will be made available throughout the school year which will help the teachers utilize the ELL component of the program more effectively. Teacher's College have adopted their lessons to meet the needs of the English Language Learners. These strategies will be used by the ENL teachers to offer extra support to our students. Our parent coordinator attends numerous workshops throughout the year that addresses the needs of our ELL students and their families. We will once again partner with the JCC (Jewish Community Center), at no cost to Title III, in order to give parent workshops where the focus is on improving the parents' overall understanding of the English language. Parents are presented with ideas regarding how they can further help their child with their specific academic needs and goals. This parent group will meet three times a week at Public School 54. Teachers to receive professional development for four hours of professional development. The first Professional Development is on October 24, 2018 from 2:30 p.m. - 4:30 p.m. The second Professional Development is on December 4, 2018 from 2:30 p.m. - 4:30 p.m. • Our two full time ENL teachers will receive the above mentioned training, as well as the classroom teachers, cluster and special education teachers that work with the ELL's in their classroom. Schedule and duration • The Office of English Language Learners sends weekly updates of professional development opportunities to the Principal. The Principal offers the following Professional Development to all teachers in the building: Using Formative Assessment within classroom lessons to keep abreast of the progress of the class. Orton Gillingham training for all teachers Universal Design for Learning to meet the learning needs of all students Developing higher order thinking questions Student Engagement Conferencing with Students during Independent Reading The workshops that teachers have already attended in previous years, at no cost to Title III have been: NYSITELL Training workshop NYSESLAT Training workshop LAC Training workshop Reading and Writing Non Fiction Instructional Implications for English Language Learners 2018-19 CEP 90  Part C: Professional Development Name of the provider The name of the provider we are using for our afterschool ENL program is Continental Press and Orton Gillingham. The materials offered by will be useful to our ELLs because they focus on oral language, and further the students' language development. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale Our Tri-ilingual parent coordinator in cooperation with the classroom teachers is able to have any form sent home to parents translated into the students’ home language. This will foster a sense of security with the family and help them to feel comfortable and confident in communicating with our school. Our parent coordinator and ENL teachers will also invite parents and children in our school library on Tuesday afternoons. We will conduct workshops with our ELL families in the areas of vocabulary, comprehension and homework help. We will give our parents the necessary skills in order to help their children succeed in school. The Parent Coordinator creates agendas for each activity and keeps records of parents who attended any given activity. She keeps these records in a file in her office. Our teachers are continually given options for their own professional growth through network workshops and training. Monday afternoons from 2:20 p.m. - 3:40 p.m. are devoted to Professional Learning and teachers participate in workshops tailored to the needs that they exhibit during Danielson Observations. We have established a partnership with Core Collaborative. Our teachers have been working on creating Assessment Capable Learners. Teachers practice writing clear Learning Intentions and Success Criteria. They are also working on self-assessment and peer-assessment with their students. Professional Development is given to strengthen these techniques for our teachers. Our ELL students will benefit from this type of instruction, as the teachers are teaching with clarity. Teachers are encouraged to establish inter visitations with their colleagues to observe best practices in the above areas. Administration coordinates these visits which contain an introduction and a debrief. All ELL parents are encouraged to attend workshops given by our parent coordinator. She reaches out to all ELL parents informing them of any upcoming workshops. Our parent coordinator offers multiple workshops on various topics throughout the year for parents. This year, our parent coordinator is working with the administration to offer workshops around Core Collaborative, Independent Reading and the importance of Read Alouds. Workshops around preparation for the state ELA and Math exam will also be offered to parents. Adult English Classes will continue to be given in conjunction by the JCC, as already mentioned above. Our ELL parents will have opportunities to be invited into the after school classrooms weekly to observe their children and to become involved in an activity with their child. They are encouraged to use the skills taught in the after school groups and adapt these skills into their child's further learning at home. 2018-19 CEP 91  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Schedule and duration, topics to be covered: In conjunction with the Principal and Assistant Principals, our parent coordinator plans workshops for parents of English Language Learners on academic topics. Parent involvement monies are used to purchase materials, speakers and any necessary items needed to effectively host the workshop. Workshops that will be offered this year are: Learning English - offered to all ELL parents in conjunction with the JCC- This group meets two times a week. NYSESLAT Workshops- Two separate workshops are offered in our school, K-2 parents and Grades 3-5 parents (Workshops are held in January) and we will also continue to offer NYSESLAT support to parents through weekly parental meeting made by the ENL teachers. Make and Take - Dolch Words for parents of English Language Learners in grades K-3 Using PS 54's Website - www.ladybugs.org Common Core Learning Standards (Overview) K-5 Go Math and Using the Profiles K-5 Importance of reading aloud to your child. (Illustrates how to interactively read to your child) Events for families of English Language Learners: Spook and Read - Our Halloween event enables parents to attend a story hour with their child and create a craft at the conclusion of the story which is directly related to the theme of the story that was read aloud. Bunny Tales - This is a Spring activity. Parents attend with their child, listen to an interactive read aloud, then complete a craft specific to the book that was read. International Food Fest at Public School 54 We have established a connection with Cornell Medical Center. Representatives work with ENL Parents to help them make good food selections. They will also escort the parents to the grocery story to help them recognize the proper way to shop for healthy foods. These representatives will also provide cooking lessons for the parents. An Evening With Teddy - Students come to school at night wearing their pajamas. They are encouraged to bring their favorite Teddy Bear with them to the event. Students listen to a story, then create a craft related to the story and enjoy a snack with their parents and the facilitator of the workshop. How parents will be notified of these activities Families will be notified of all events through the home school correspondence system which we have in place for all our students. Through this system, all students receive a durable red pocket folder at the beginning of the school year. Teachers place all correspondence on one side of the folder, and all returning correspondence is placed on the other side. This folder is reviewed by both parents and teachers daily. Information for all activities are distributed to students well in advance of the planned date. In addition, PS 54 has a telephone information system entitled, "Global Connect." The Principal and Parent Coordinator use this system to alert parents to upcoming events. Our school web-site www.ladybugs.org is available for all parents. A PS 54 calendar and schedule of upcoming events is posted on the home page. There is a link for translation of this information as well. With the assistance of the Parent Coordinator, all PS54 teachers and staff have access to the DOE translation services. Documents needing translation are forwarded to the Parent Coordinator, who has them translated and sent home in the native language. The DOE Telephone translation unit is also utilized during conferences requiring translations when this need cannot be addressed by our multilingual staff. Our Parent Coordinator often call parents at home, and/or greets them at arrival/dismissal. At these times she extends invitations and/or announcements of school events and functions. She also keeps a bulletin board at the entrance of the school up to date with school related activities or workshops available to ELL parents. 2018-19 CEP 92 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 93  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Public School 54 Borough select one School Number 54 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Karen Catanzaro LaRosa Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jennifer Portney/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Hilda Portalatin/Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Kalfa/Kindergarten Related-Service Provider Lisa Dickstein/Speech teacher Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Barbara Kenney Coach N/A School Counselor Charles Fernando Parent Lesvia Carbajal Parent Coordinator Maria Titolo Field Support Center Staff Member Enrico Domingo Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 CEP 94  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 785 Total number of ELLs 59 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.52% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools used to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, include Teacher's College Reading Assessment in grades K-5; and MOSL Performance Tasks K-5. These Assessments give teachers information about what ELL students already know, and what they still need to learn. Teachers use these assessments, along with multiple and varied formative assessments, to plan for targeted instruction and intervention. PS 54 has also purchased MYON Reader, which is a computer based reading program that enables students to read books on their independent level. MYON Reader tracks the amount of time and books the children read. It also shows the increase in independent reading levels over time. 2018-19 CEP 95  In addition, our ELLs take baseline online assessments in our afterschool Title III program using the Raz Kids computer online learning program. The Raz Kids also has a component that helps prepare children for the ELA state test. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures in place in order to support this effort is staff development within our school for new programs. ENL teachers as well as the classroom teachers work collaboratively to implement these new programs and communicate daily in order to gather student progress, 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We implement NYC performance tasks in our school, as well as New York State exemplars that the students are required to do in the classroom. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? When the summative data has been gathered our teacher teams meet to review and develop a plan of action in the classroom in order to reach the students' full learning needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school is aware of the three tiers involved in the RTI framework. In our Tier 2 system we plan on increasing the time and intensity of the ELLs exposure to the core curriculum for the children who do not appear to be responding appropriately to Tier 1 instructions. We have found that across the grades our ELLs struggle in the area of writing. We continue to focus on the conventions of writing with our ELLs. Our classroom teachers who work with our ELL students follow the the three Tier system for Response to Intervention. Students with IEPs and/or students with disabilities are given intensive intervention and are in Tier III and are given structured small group work by the classroom teacher. If any ENL student is brought up to the PPT team the team discusses the child in terms of the three Tiers of intervention. We also offer our ENL afterschool program which uses the Raz Kids computer learning program and close reading passages in order to foster childrens' comprehension and communication skills. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We closely monitor NYSESLAT scores once they are released early in the new school year. We compare how each child performed from one year to the next. We look at growth, or loss of points on the NYSESLAT exam, and our ENL teachers and classroom teachers work on a plan on how to best reach the ENL students. We have used a lot of close reading strategies with our upper grade ELLs and focused on alphabet and letter recognition and sounds with our younger ELLs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We monitor our ELLs progress with classroom tests, classroom participation, Teachers College Reading Levels and exemplars. Our classroom teachers and ENL teacher note progress of how each ELL is performing within the classroom and make note on other academic areas that require remediation and/or extra assistance. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 96  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ENL teachers will use a combination of integrated ENL and freestanding ENL based on the needs and ENL minutes of our ELL students. We insure that our ELL students get the required mandated minutes in accordance to their NYSELSAT learning levels (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding). Total number of minutes fro Entering and Emerging students are 360 minutes, Transitioning and Expanding students are 180 minutes, and Commanding students receive 90 minutes. b. TBE program. If applicable. We do not have a TBE program in our school at this time. c. DL program. If applicable. We do not have a Dual Language program in our school at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ENL teachers check each ELLs NYSESLAT level at the beginning of the school year. They use this information in order to make their ENL schedules with the teachers. If the child requires standalone ENL or integrated ENL, the ENL provider will work with the classroom teacher so every ELL gets their required and mandated time of ENL instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in the classroom environment as well as the ENL classroom, depending on the ELLs particular level of language development. Content is delivered through collaboration with all teachers who are involved with each particular ELL through grades k-5th grade. Our program model is stand alone ENL as well as integrated ENL in the classroom. Our content is delivered in our classroom discussions, turn and turn with partners, close reading strategies, group work and feedback from peers and teachers. Our school uses the Teacher's College model of instruction for English Language Arts, and Go Math for mathematics instruction. We also implement exemplars in math, children use the writing continuum in English Language Arts, as well as MOSL development at the end of the year. These various tools of instruction help us to foster that the core content is delivered to our ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Prospective ELLs are interviewed in the HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey) process at the beginning of the school year. Once we know a child's home language and they are identified as an ELL we make sure to take their home language into consideration when speaking with the child and also contacting the parents at home. A valuable asset to our school is the Language Line and the Translation and Interpretation Services. Language Line is used on a daily basis for teacher and parent meetings, IEP meetings, and parent teacher conferences. If material needs to be translated we make our parent coordinator aware of this and translate the document in question using the Translation and Interpretation services. 2018-19 CEP 97  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) We do not have SIFE students at PS54. If SIFE students enroll at PS54 we will ensure all necessary intervention is placed with the child and take their home language into account as well. b) Newcomers are given much support as they transition into PS54. We give them a buddy to help them adjust to PS 54. Because we do have many languages at PS 54, we make every effort to buddy the newcomer with a student who speaks the newcomer's language. We also ensure that the newcomer is seen by the ENL teacher. If the student is in grades 2-5, they are invited to attend our Title III Afterschool Program. At our Title III program we have found success with the Raz Kids computer program, we use the online components for the student on an individual basis, and the guided reading portion to small groups in our Title III Afterschool Program. We also introduce the newcomer to our MYON Reader, which is our computer based reading program. Many times, low levels of the MYON Reader, which focus on basic vocabulary and picture recognition are helpful to the newcomer. Oral language and realia are used to aid in comprehension for the newcomer, while they are developing language skills. c) Developing students require more assistance in reading and vocabulary development and writing. In addition to services from the ENL teacher, classroom teachers use the ENL component to Teacher's College which offers strategies for ELLs. MYON reader and our Title III afteschool program are also offered to our developing ELLs. d) Long term ELLs are encouraged to become more independent as readers and writers. Support is still provided by the ENL teacher as they push into the classroom. Teachers continue to use the ENL Component to Teacher's College in classroom instruction to give support to the Long Term ELLS. e) For ELLs (Commanding) up to two years after service after exiting ELL status we give them their mandated 90 minutes of instruction. Many of the former ELLs still require some help in the higher level vocabulary and the more challenging DOK level questioning. The ELL provider helps the former ELLs with these skills, as well as skills they need to succeed in their classroom setting 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The past data indicated that students with disabilities (SWDs) in self contained classes do not meet promotional criteria on ELA exams. During the 2017 - 2018 school year, we will be a Teacher's College Partnership School. This partnership affords us ten days of professional development within PS 54 and the opportunity for teachers to attend Calendar Days at Teacher's College. Some of the professional development given by Teacher's College will be geared toward ELL Students. It is the intention that this change in pedagogy and curriculum will give more support to the students with disabilities and therefore will show an increase in their future ELA scores. Students with disabilities will receive AIS support from a licensed Reading Teacher. She will use Stephanie Harvey's Guide to Reading and Writing. She will focus on guided reading and meet the child where he or she is performing to ensure academic growth in reading and math. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP 98  Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility in order to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals accordingly by working closely with the special education teachers and the Special Education Coordinator as well as the SETTS teacher on staff. These teachers work along with the students IEP goals and sees that their learning targets are met accordingly. The ENL teacher is also in on this communication process and contributes their expertise in order to help the student as well. Lastly, our SIT team meets monthly in order to review IEPs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs are our Title III program that is offered to all ELLs. The program will usually run during the weekday for our 3rd-5th grade students and on Saturdays for our K-2nd grade students. The program duration is usually about 12 weeks and fosters a positive learning environment for the ELLs. ELLs this year were working on the Raz Kids computer program. This year we also incorporated the TADA musical program to our K-2nd grade ELLS. This musical theater program incorporated language and speaking skills through song and dance. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We introduced the TADA musical program for the first time in 2017 and it was a huge success with teachers, students and parents. We would also like to incorporate this musical theater program with our older students in grades three through five. It was a strong program that fostered confidence while strengthening language and vocabulary skills. Some of our ELL students who also have an IEP take part in Sundog Theater 3d Program. This program is designed for Students with Disabilities and ELLs. It is a research based program that promotes confidence through theater and literacy. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our school does not a bilingual program at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are always included in any after school program offered in our school. Flyers are sent to all students, depending on grade level readiness. For our after school Title III program we used the Raz Kids computer program as well as the TADA theater program this school year. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school incorporates the MYON computer learning system to all students in grade K-5th grade. We also use the Raz Kids computer program in our after school Title III program. All students receive the same instructional materials for English Language Arts and Mathematics. Consumable books are purchased each year for our school's Go Math program. Our 3rd-5th grade students use consumable books for ELA and Math state test preparation. We also offer a Saturday program for additional practice in getting the students ready and prepared for the ELA and Math state tests. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? PS 54 considers home language support a priority. This helps foster a working and professional relationship with our ENL Families. The student's home language is assessed and delivered in our ENL program by the initial meeting the ENL teacher has with the family at registration. The language line is used to make the families comfortable using their home language and the ENL teacher makes sure to use the language line in order to answer any and all questions the parents have about their child 2018-19 CEP 99  beginning their education here at Public School 54. The parents are offered the HLIS in their preferred language (when available), as well as Parent Surveys and other handouts given to parents at the initial ENL placement meeting. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services/ resources support are carefully corresponded to the ELLs ages and grade levels. Teachers ENL, and support staff are careful to work closely together in order to create age appropriate support and services for the ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does not share a building (co-location) at the present time. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our Parent Coordinator organizes a parent outreach group that meets twice a month for newly admitted ENL parents. This group is coordinated and sponsored the JCC. Parents learn English and are able to socialize with other new ENL families. Through this group we hope that our new ENL parents have the opportunity to feel comfortable in our school community and this outreach group helps them assimilate into our school. We also have a dietican from Cornell University come in monthly and meet with parents about the dietary needs and the nutrition of their family. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school does not offer language electives at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our school does not have a dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers attend all training provided by the Office of ELLs and our boro field offices. Administration looks to place the ELLs in one classroom on each grade. The teachers of the classes that contain the ELLs will be invited to attend any professional development that is offered. Our professional development continues to focus on the Core Collaborative (Success Criteria and Learning Intentions), and the ENL providers are all present at each workshop. They also help the teachers implement these new initiatives in the classroom. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 100  The50 % of total hours will be given at ENL professional development given by the boro field office or other meetings that become available during the school year. Any new information the ENL teachers receive at professional development will be turn keyed to the particular grades they service. This will cover the 15 % of total hours for all teachers. Professional development records are all copied and given to the school secretary and copies are located in the teacher's file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During parent engagement on Tuesday afternoons from 2:30-3:15 the ENL teachers schedule individual meetings with the ENL parents. The ENL teacher will also use her preparation periods to meet with parents. ENL teachers are asked to attend the child's IEP meetings if the ELL has an IEP. During any meeting the ENL teacher provides the number of the Language Line so parents have a way to communicate at the meeting in their preferred language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents including ENL parents are invited to tour our kindergarten classrooms in early September at the start of school year. This will help the children feel comfortable about their new learning environment. Parents and students are able to speak with the teacher as they tour their new classroom and drop off supplies. We also offer a welcome breakfast in early September at the start of the school year. Parents are able to sit alongside the parent coordinator, principal and assistant principal and are able to ask questions about our school and the curriculum we use at PS54. In June, kindergarten parents are invited to a tea. The incoming parents get to meet the kindergarten teachers, parent coordinator, principal and assistant principal. This serves as an early welcome to the parents. The ENL parent group that meets twice a month have celebrations on a daily basis. They celebrate the parents within the group as well as their school community. Parents are also included in school celebrations, such as school dances, Pre K & K bubbles dance party, and holiday themed celebrations. Our parent coordinator coordinates trips with our ELL parents to New York City. One trip is to the Jacob Javits Center for their ELL parent convention. Another trip to New York University focused on parent workshops ranging from curriculum to college readiness for their child. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. PS 54 ofrfers a rich program for our ELLs. Our two ESL teachers were both rated Highly Effective for the past two school years. Our Parent Coordinator is involved in planning activities for our ELL parents. We have a partnership with TADA Musical Theater and Sundog Theater to further help ELL students improve in language and literacy. 2018-19 CEP 101  2018-19 CEP 102 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Karen Catanzaro LaRosa, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 103  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Public School 54 School DBN: 31R054 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Karen Catanzaro LaRosa Principal Barbara Kenney Assistant Principal Maria Titolo Parent Coordinator Jennifer Portney ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lesvia Carbajal Parent Elizabeth Kalfa Teacher/Subject Area Hilda Portalatin Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Charles Fernando School Counselor Anthony Lodico Enrique Domingo N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Enrique Domingo Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A 09/7/17 09/7/17 09/7/17 09/7/17 09/7/17 09/7/17 09/7/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 09/7/17 09/7/17 09/7/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 104  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R054 School Name: Public School 54 Superintendent: Anthony LoDico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Maria Jennifer Titolo Portney Parent Coordinator ENL Coordinator Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school has in place access to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for all necessary communications with parents in any language other than English. ATS reports and the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) are also used to access parent's home language. Our bilingual Parent Coordinator, Maria Titolo translates all documents needed by staff in Spanish. When necessary, if we need to send out a short letter or concern, our school uses Google Translate as a method to communicate with parents in their preferred home language. 2018-19 CEP 105  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Row Labels ALBANIAN ARABIC ARAUCANIAN BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CANTONESE CHINESE ANY MANDARIN SINHALESE SPANISH UKRAINIAN URDU YORUBA Written Preferred Parents often ask for their home language in written communication with teachers. We try our best to accommodate parents in this area. Percent Written Sum of Oral Sum of Percent 4 7 1 1 4 30 16 2 39 5 6 1 Oral 0.47 0.83 0.12 0.12 0.47 3.55 1.89 0.24 4.62 0.59 0.71 0.12 Oral Preferred 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. No languages at this time represent at least a 10% population in our school. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families The documents that we translate for our school are the following: parent handbook, all information regarding report cards, any curriculum meetings and information on open school. We follow the school calendar to send out important memos to parents. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The parent coordinator will receive a request from a teacher or staff member for a document to be translated. The documents are given to the parent coordinator in a timely 2018-19 CEP 106 Welcome back letters and handbooks are sent in September. manner, usually 2-3 weeks before the scheduled event. Our parent coordinator gets requests from staff members and will translate according to requests. She translates all documents needed in Spanish. IEP meetings Report Cards are sent in accordance with the DOE school calendar. Curriculum meetings are often scheduled in October, March and May. Open School is held in November and March. When translation is needed the parent coordinator will send this out for translation. The parent coordinator will receive a request from a teacher or staff member for a document to be translated. The documents are given to the parent coordinator in a timely manner, usually 2-3 weeks before the scheduled event. The parent coordinator will receive a request from a teacher or staff member for a document to be translated. The documents are given to the parent coordinator in a timely manner, usually 2-3 weeks before the scheduled event. Report Cards We hand out translated report cards by request. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Our school follows all mandated parent teacher conferences as well as curriculum nights as determined by the Department of Education. Our ENL teachers also reach out to parents during the mandated parent outreach time every Tuesday from 2:20-3:35. Parent teacher conferences are scheduled in November, March and May. Curriculum nights are October, March, and May. How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our parent coordinator is always communicating with teachers to see who needs the help of the interpretation services. 2018-19 CEP 107  Kindergarten registration The Language Access hotline is used for any new families that don't speak English. Our ENL teachers are always available at registration in order to help parents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school uses phone blasts often throughout the school year to communicate with our families. The school will also use its bi lingual staff in order to translate at parent meetings or over the phone communication. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our principal will send out daily reminders to use translation and interpretation services when needed by the staff,as well as communicate with the parent coordinator for any translating needs. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The parents are aware of school information in many areas of the school building. The school has a welcome multi-lingual poster hanging at the entrance of the school building. Language ID Guides as well as other important parent documents are hanging on a board in the school main office. A bulletin board is hanging in the school lobby for various school and community functions, many of the documents are also translated in multiple languages. Newsletters, information for parents, school parent meetings and various other events are available in language and other languages in the school lobby displayed in a circular display. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 108  The ENL teachers review all parent surveys and Home Language Surveys and keep the documents in binders in the ENL teachers' classrooms. The ENL teachers communicate on a daily basis with classroom teachers in order to meet the families preferred language needs. 2018-19 CEP 109 
