2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R059 School Name: THE HARBOR VIEW SCHOOL Principal: CAROL MONGIELLO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 59 The Harbor View School 31R059 School Number (DBN): 353100010059 Pre-k through5thGrade 300 Richmond Terrace SI NY 10301 718-390-2190 Phone Number: 718-390-2195 Fax: Dawn Irizarry dirizarry@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Carol Mongiello Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Melissa Beitchman Aja Harris Dawn Irizarry Christine Duenas N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: Anthony Lodico Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace - Staten Island, New York 10301 Alodico@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: District 31 FSC: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Kevin Moran Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  715 Ocean Terrace – Staten Island , New York 10301 Executive Director’s Office Address: KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Carol Mongiello Melissa Beitchman Aja Harris Meggin Juraska Christine Duenas Arndreya Healy Therisa Thompson-Parmenter Elizabeth Speck *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Chelsea Sydow Dawn Irizarry Christina Rodriguez Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school, P.S.59 The Harbor View School, prides itself in the diversity and individuality of its educational community. We are relentlessly committed to meeting the needs of our students and improving learning outcomes by making purposeful decisions about the school environment and curricula. Through an inquiry-based approach, children develop the skills of investigation, problem-solving, critical thinking, communication and creativity while exploring the richness of the world around them. It can begin with our youngest learners, and grow in complexity and scaffold student learning up through the grades. Our standards-based curriculum, teaching methodologies, and valuable partnerships with external organizations support students and families in promoting academic, social, and 2018-19 CEP 9  emotional growth. We work diligently to prepare our students with the high-level skills they need to succeed in an increasingly complex and interconnected world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is a rich and diverse learning community. Our demographics data of our total 301 students include 125 Hispanic students, 3 American-Indian or Alaskan Native, 3 Asian, 2 Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, 101 Black, 44 White and 23 Multi-Racial. Our community thrives on developing a culture of collaborative learning. Members of our learning community participate in frequent and varied professional learning opportunities. The focus and occurrence of our sessions are determined by the Professional Learning Committee. This team includes the Principal, Assistant Principal, UFT Chapter Leader and interested staff. At the beginning of the year, all staff members complete a survey to assess their individual professional learning needs and interests. These surveys are reviewed by the team and utilized to inform decisions made in planning professional learning. Throughout the year, the administrative staff conducts informal and formal classroom observations. They meet regularly with staff to read research articles, discuss best practices and participate in training, provided in-house and by external organizations. Teachers engage regularly in conversations around curricular practices and student learning. Through their participation in collaborative learning teams, teachers are given the opportunity to learn together, apply learning to the classroom, and reflect on what works and why. Talking to other teachers, hearing different ideas, and reflecting on their own approaches is an important component to the teacher’s continued development and implementation of any skill at our school. Just as learning improves for students when they have the structured opportunity to reflect on what they know and don’t know, adults also benefit from intentional reflection on classroom practice. In addition, time is allotted during our Monday Extended Day Session for teachers to share their teaching experiences or their approaches to new ideas with other teachers. In teams, teachers plan strategically for interactive modeling, the school’s instructional focus, in order to support the academic development of students. Our teachers received professional learning focusing on the Responsive Classroom Approach. As a direct result, teachers have created a social/emotional curriculum that is active, appropriately challenging, purposeful and connected to students’ interests. Each day begins with a morning meeting that is meant to nurture a sense of belonging, significance, and emotional safety so that students feel comfortable taking risks and working with a variety of peers. It sets the tone for the day and helps build community while addressing the individual needs of students. Centers throughout the classrooms include literature in various languages, writing journals and transitional objects to promote attachment, empathy and community. A cozy corner is available to students as needed to take a break or regroup before participating in the daily life of the classroom. The success of our school is attributed to its culture. In addition, our teachers participated in a series of professional learning sessions with The Core Collaborative. The Core Collaborative is a professional learning network specializing in student-centered approaches to learning. Our teachers focused on developing student self and peer assessments, formative assessments, developing a deeper understanding of standards and formative assessments. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  We currently serve grades Pre-K to 5th with approximately 300 students, 19% of have IEPs.  There is one ICT classroom on each grade from Kindergarten to 5th with a total of six classrooms.  We have 2 ELL students in grades 3 & 4, one is emerging, and the other is commanding. We have an F Status  ENL teacher to service their mandates. In addition, we have full-time special education teacher that provides SETTS and AIS services to students identified as needing academic intervention. There are presently 4 students in grades 4 & 5 receiving Setts in Math. There are 5 receiving setts in ELA 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In reviewing our school survey reports, state test results and observation reports it is evident that the greatest gains are evident in the area of rigorous instruction. Key members of the learning community worked collaboratively to identify areas in need of strengthening and development. The stakeholders included: administration, instructional staff, field office liaisons and member of the School Leadership Team. As a key component of the work, members examined trends in the data, analyzed their impact on teaching and learning and made instructional decisions. * Through a partnership with Examplars, a school-wide approach to problem-solving was adopted and implemented across all grade bands. Teachers participated in regular cycles of professional learning, inter-visitation and examining student work. As a direct result, students actively engaged in problem solving activities that were differentiated to meet their individual learning needs and enabled them to develop critical thinking skills. * Students participated in an after school program designed to engage students in common core aligned activities and increase their skills in English Language Arts and Mathematics . * During the extended professional development time, all staff participated in cycles of Mathematics focused PD aimed at developing a deeper understanding of the Instructional Shifts and the alignment to Common Core Standards in designing highly engaging and rigorous instruction. Our state data 2017-2018 in ELA and Math: ELA Math 2017 - 42% Proficient (45 tested) 2018 - 60% Proficient (83 tested) 2017 - 13% Proficient (45 tested) 2018 - 29% Proficient (78 tested) 2018 - NYC District 31 Average (53% Proficient) 2018 - NYC District 31 Average (47% Proficient) 2018 - New York State Average (45% Proficient) 2018 - New York State Average (45% Proficient) In ELA, our 3rd students demonstrated ● 10% decrease in the total number of students performing on a Level 1 ● 8% decrease in total number of students performing at a Level 2 ● 11% increase in total number of students performing at a Level 3 ● 7% increase in the total number of students performing at a Level 4 In Math, our 3rd students demonstrated 2018-19 CEP 11  ● 23% decrease in the total number of students performing at a Level 1 ● 7% decrease in total number of students performing at a Level 2 ● 8% increase in total number of students performing at a Level 3 ● 9% increase in total number of students performing at a Level 4 Although we made significant gains in math, we are still below the city and district average. Our focus this year is to continue putting an emphasis on strengthening instructional practices in mathematics, increased opportunities for professional learning and engaging all students in rich curriculum with differentiated learning practices and supports. In addition, great gains were made in the element of Strong Family Community Ties. Key to the success of creating a positive environment is that we prioritize in establishing caring, respectful relationships among all members of the learning community. The culture of our school is evident throughout our learning community. It is visible upon entering the building in the manner that individuals are greeted, the conversations that occur beyond the classroom environment, the displays that adorn our walls and the countless opportunities provided to students, staff and families to come together and work collaboratively towards continuous improvement. This is evident in how teachers, students, staff support personnel and families think, act, and feel day in and day out in the school. In order to accomplish this it was necessary to create a culture of participation for planning and implementing goals and tasks. As evidenced in our 2017-2018 School Survey: ● 91% of families felt our school staff regularly communicates with them on how they can help their child learn. ● 92% of families surveyed strongly agree that our school gives them opportunities to visit their child’s classroom to observe and participate in classroom activities. ● 97% of families felt that they are greeted warmly when they visit or call the school ● 93% of families feel they are able to work closely with their child's teacher to meet their needs. ● 93% of families feel they are well informed by communication they receive from the school ● 97% feel they are respected by their child's teacher Our 2018-2019 Instructional Focus is enhance our ability to utilize questioning and discussion techniques to leverage student learning using interactive modeling as a tool to improve learning experiences at our school. This focus, which is directly aligned to our vision, allows us to develop inquiry skills with a focus on questioning and self-assessment in order to support our students in growing academically, socially and emotionally. When planning for our work, the following questions serve as a guide: 2018-19 CEP 12  • How did I interactively model this expectation? • How did the questions I asked allow for investigation, problem solving, critical thinking, communication, creativity and exploration? • How did I provide opportunities for self-assessment? At the Harbor View School, we believe that learning is largely social in nature. At the core of our values and beliefs is our social studies themed project-based approach to learning, centered around an understanding of how people, places and events came about and how people can relate and respond to each others needs and desires. By focusing on academic as well as interpersonal skills related to our beliefs, we are able to grow our students’ ability to question and self-assess, challenging their thinking, and stretching them to higher intellectual growth. This work will be evidenced in our observation feedback, our professional learning plans, our Morning Meetings and our interactions our colleagues, our students and their families each day. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R059 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 263 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 3 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 60.0% % Attendance Rate 54.8% % Reduced Lunch 0.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 42.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 12.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 0% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 60.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 32 32 92.9% 6.5% 20.5% 34.6% 2.7% 7.2% 2 13% 9.9 29.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 59 The Harbor View School is in its sixth year with two classes on each grade including: pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, first grade, second, third, fourth and fifth grade classes. Our school’s philosophy is centered around an inquiry and project-based approach to learning. To support our school’s vision, our instructional team meets regularly to write a curriculum that meets the needs of our learning community as well as addresses our school’s mission and vision. ● There is curricula coherence across grades and subjects and disciplined inquiry and student successful demonstration of new learning through imagination and persistence on the part of all students. ● Four to six-week project-based units of study infuse big ideas from the Social Studies Framework and are centered around the interconnectedness of people, places and events, as well as how people relate and respond to each others needs. ● To emphasize rigorous work habits, teachers create units of study that include interactive modeling, investigation, creativity, and exploration. For example, a Kindergarten unit entitled “The History of Me” includes an overarching question that explores what makes individuals unique, enduring understandings around opinions, feelings, and life experiences, and unit subtopics that require students to make connections across all social sciences including geography and economics. ● Teachers participate on structured teacher teams targeting the school’s instructional focus and lead professional learning for colleagues around the implementation of the CCLS and research-based teaching practices. ● In teams, teachers plan strategically for interactive modeling, the school’s instructional focus, in order to support the academic development of students. For example, in pre-kindergarten, teachers work within 7-10 focus standards that serve as the foundation for each unit and are effectively designed to support students in asking and answering questions, responding to text, and making predictions. ● School leaders promote an environment whereby teacher team decisions drive the work of school improvement efforts through input in the development project-based curricula across grades. ● Across units, anchor texts include a combination of literary and informational texts as well as text-based questions designed to advance student understanding of the overarching question, enduring understandings, and unit sub-topics. Close reading of books require students to use text-based evidence to answer the essential question through the development of an authentic work product. 2018-19 CEP 15  As evidenced 2017-2018 Principal Performance Observation (PPO): Area of Celebration: Teachers align and revise units and lessons to the CCLS using both purchased curricula, the Department fo Educations Social Studies, Passport, teacher created material aligned to your schools focus aligned to the New York Harbor and maritime related studies. partnerships with the Staten Island Foundations, Billion Oyster Project, Snug harbor, Urban Assembly and the Harbor School enrich the curricula and provide professional learning opportunities for teachers. As a result, you have established a positive school culture connecting the student to the community, while creating a safe and supportive learning environment. (1.1,1.3,1.4) As evidenced in 2017-2018 Principal Observation (PPO) Priority needs: ● As a growing school, there is a need to develop a curriculum for the incoming fifth grade classes that aligns to our mission, philosophy and expectations. ● There is a need to continue to revise, edit, enhance and further develop the existing curriculum developed by our team of teachers and staff members in the other grades. ● Ensure that there is vertical alignment across all grades and a strong integration of the instructional shifts and CCLS. ● Develop strong formative assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our fifth grade team will design CCLS aligned units of study, performance tasks and rubrics which incorporate the 5 social sciences; history, economics, current events, international studies and geography, utilizing the Social Studies Scope and Sequence, Principles of Backwards by Design and Universal Design for Learning. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Major pieces of the curriculum are being designed during planning sessions including; ● Summer professional development with new teachers to our school community to foster understanding of our school’s approach to instruction, school culture and expectations. ● Per- session opportunities to develop the fifth grade curriculum, select and order anchor and supporting texts, create rubrics and write performance tasks for each unit. ● Monthly full-day curriculum planning sessions for all grades. ● Teachers will meet regularly at different times throughout the week to reflect and adjust curriculum needs based on daily interactions with content and assessment data. ● Professional development on Monday afternoons as part of our extended day for all teachers and paraprofessionals in deepening their knowledge around literacy standards, differentiated instruction for all learners, approaches to instruction, inquiry and project-based learning and assessment. As part of our school mission, partnering with outside organizations will enhance the curriculum and deepen student’s content knowledge. Each residency begins with a planning session with teachers and paraprofessionals to ensure alignment to the curriculum and a connectedness to the topics being explored. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 to June 2019 ● Administration ● Lead teachers ●New teachers ● Existing teachers and assistant teachers  Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and Families participate in varied opportunities to support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home: 2018-19 CEP 17  * In the Spring and Summer, all new families are invited to attend an Open House Orientation upon registering for our school. During this meeting they view a power point presentation, tour the school building, learn about the school philosophy and culture and ask questions. This event is organized and hosted by the Parent Coordinator. * In the Fall, families are invited to a Back To School Night. During this event, they visit their child's classroom, meet their teacher and other families in the school community, receive information and expectations relevant to the curriculum, home-school connections and field experiences. The Parent Teacher Association is available to answer questions and discuss ways to become involved in the school community. * Administration shares during monthly Parent Teacher Association meetings the latest experiences the children are receiving during the school day and informs parents of upcoming workshops. Workshops are hosted by teachers, parent coordinator, educational organizations and non-profit community organizations. These workshops range from home-school connection assistance to testing anxiety understanding the shift in the common core standards. * At the end of each unit of study (approx 4 per grade)families and members of the community are invited to hear from students on their learning throughout the unit of study. In the process, students design the components of the learning share and create brochures. Students lead conversations at work stations showcasing important learning and sharing information relevant to the unit of study. * The Principal, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator host two "My School, My Voice" Community meetings to discuss the schools curriculum, instructional focus, share data and hear parents concerns and needs for their child's academic needs. * Families are informed on a regular basis of progress and expectations. Three times a year a narrative is provided to families highlighting their child’s strengths and areas of growth. Several children have individual communication logs. Teachers call and write messages as necessary and the school website class pages are updated regularly with class news and information. * Teachers meet regularly with families/students to review and discuss work samples, set individual learning goals and design next steps. These meetings are documented on a shared drive with administration to ensure communication is consistent with all families. *Teachers utilize the Tuesday extended block time to meet with and/or have phone conversations with families. During this time they communicate about progress students are making towards goals, establish partnerships and engage families in supporting their child’s learning. * School’s website and weekly email/text/phone blasts share the schools information and updates by the Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Staffing of new teachers for fifth grade and an additional cluster position. ● Per Session opportunities and Per Diem for teachers full day planning. ● Purchasing of instructional materials such as class sets of anchor texts, supporting texts and supplies to support centers. ● Allocating funds for field experiences connected the units of study. 2018-19 CEP 18  ● Allocating funds for parent workshop series. ● Allocating funds for residencies to enhance the curriculum for all grades. ● Allocating funds for professional development outside vendors. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To ensure the development of the curriculum is ongoing, reflective and meeting our goals, teacher teams will engage in the following; ● Units are mapped out in advance with dates for baseline assessments and performance tasks. All units of study are on a shared Google Drive where teachers and administrators work and document changes. Teachers meet weekly during Tuesdays Common Planning time to revisit the units and design lesson plans based on feedback from student work and performance. ● Fountas and Pinell to be administered by teachers three times a year (October, January and April) helps to monitor student reading level growth. ● Weekly documentation of student progress using Work Sampling System. Work Sampling Online Checklists completed in the Fall, Winter and Spring cycle. ● Baseline and end of unit performance tasks are administered for every unit of study. ● MOSL will provide data regarding student progress in the fall and in the spring. ● Teacher and family surveys will be provided after professional development sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) ● Baseline and end of unit performance tasks are administered for every unit of study. ● MOSL will provide data regarding student progress in the fall and in the spring. ● Teacher and family surveys will be provided after professional development sessions. Weekly minutes of additions, edits and changes made to the curriculum on the shared Google drive. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Students are supported and challenged by our Responsive Classroom approach to teaching, where teachers work with students in whole and small groups to provide maximum support in emotional, social and academic competencies. This model provides students with a sense of belonging and encourages them to take risks among peers in a safe, warm and nurturing environment. Every classroom begins their day with a morning meeting sessions which encompasses four components: a greeting, a message and share and a group activity and end their day with a reflective circle. As a new school which is growing a grade every year, we are faced with the challenge of training new staff members and ensuring their is a deep understanding and belief that integrating academic and social-emotional skills creates an environment where students can do their best learning. The priority need is to decrease the number of suspensions and incidents as measured by the OORS report 2017-2018 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of the implementation of Responsive Classroom professional development for teachers, there will be a 10% decrease in the number of suspensions and incidents, as measured by the 2018-2019 OORS report, compared to the number of suspensions and incidents, as measured by the 2017-2018 OORS report. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All new teachers, paraprofessionals and service providers will receive training by a Responsive Classroom Staff Developer. All new staff members Sept. 2017 - March 2018 Administration Investing in Responsive Classroom Professional Libraries All Staff Sept. 2017 - June 2018 Administration Professional development sessions at least one Monday every month. Topics to be covered - morning meeting, interactive modeling and addressing behaviors. All Staff Sept. 2017- Administration June 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our instructional and administrative team will continue to collaboratively plan to engage families and support their understanding of the Supportive Environment. This will entail monthly parent workshops, evening events and collaborations with community based organizations. Parent workshops will include topics such as: Understanding your Child's Curriculum, Preparing for a Successful Year, Helping your Child with Home-Connections, and Transition to the Next Grade. These will be planned and scheduled throughout the year by the instructional staff and Parent Coordinator. During student led conferences, parents experience Responsive Classroom practices through the key components of morning meeting. In addition, at the end of every unit, families are invited to participate in a learning share that is led by students and showcases the students' learning. The Parent Coordinator will also partner with the St. George Library, Jewish Community Center, Person Centered Care Services and Staten Island Mental health for outside services to include literacy development, mental health, after-school programming and referrals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Inter-visitations, professional readings, inter-active modeling and supporting staff through frequent observation and feedback sessions.  Purchase Responsive classroom library.  Secure funding for Responsive Classroom trainer for one day of training for all staff.  Teacher per session and per diem, if applicable 2018-19 CEP 21   Supervisor per session, if applicable Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019 - Survey new teachers and staff members on the level of comfort with applying Responsive Classroom Approaches, additional supports and resources they may need and any further topics within the approach they would like to explore further. Use Advance data in Domain 2: The Classroom Environment. Review Data from OORS to evaluate the number of incidents and suspensions.February 2019 - Use data from Work Sampling System Checklist ratings in Personal/Social Development to measure progress from the Fall to the Winter period. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reflect on new teacher observations from September 2018 to May 2019 to measure the impact of Responsive Classroom on Danielson's Domains 2a: Establishing an Environment of Respect and Rapport and Domain 2d: Managing Student Behaviors. Review Data from OORS to evaluate the number of incidents and suspensions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school’s focus is to get to know our community and all of New York City through rich units of study, especially by experiencing and engaging with a variety of locations, items and people related to the content being studied. Through partnerships with external organization, teachers and students will have varied opportunities to engage in rich, meaningful and authentic learning experiences. In addition, these partnerships will afford our school community the opportunity to build capacity within our school so our teachers can continue to support the arts within their classroom environment and curriculum. Strengths: ● Our New York State 2017-2018 ELA Data for for all students in 3rd and 4th grades demonstrates that 60.2% student are performing at or above grade level. There was an increase of 18% in ELA from the year prior. ● Teachers engage in frequent professional learning focused on high expectations for all students through modeling, inter-visitation, and ongoing feedback, allowing them to meet the school’s rigorous set of expectations for teaching and learning. ● School leaders provide direct coaching inside the classroom as well through individualized meetings around specific needs. ● Teachers participate regularly in learning walks and inter-visitation designed to promote professional dialogue and reflection around instructional practices and curriculum and increase outcomes for student learning and curriculum mapping. Priority Needs: ● As a growing school community, ensure that all new members are provided varied opportunities for professional development aligned to the vision and mission of the school. ● Secure planning time for staff and the resident teaching artists to meet and plan a program that aligns to the work and vision of the school. ● Continue to collaborate with external partnerships in integrating the units of study and align the work in a meaningful way to what students are learning and to Common Core State Standards. Action Plan: Teachers will work with a local residency program to develop a curriculum aligned to our units of study and be implemented by the classroom teacher once a week. At least 6 teachers will have curriculum outlined after the 2018-19 CEP 23  second teacher professional development session. Teachers will work collaboratively to design instruction, facilitate learning and assess student work during this scheduled time. Through this relationship, we will continue to see evidence of content knowledge as evidenced by the baseline and end of unit performance task for each unit of study. Our students in kindergarten through 5th grades will participate in at least one in-school residency throughout the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students in grades Kindergarten through Fifth Grade will demonstrate an increase in their content knowledge and vocabulary through the collaboration of an in-school residency program aligned to our units of study as measured by the baseline and end of unit performance tasks in a unit of study. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Professional development with new and existing teachers in our school community to foster understanding of our school’s approach to instruction, school culture and expectations. New teachers Existing teachers Each unit of study is approximately 4 to 6 weeks. Administration Lead Teachers ● Teachers will work alongside resident artist to plan instruction, facilitate rich experiences and evaluate student learning. ● Teachers on a grade meet twice during a common planning time to analyze the data from the performance tasks. ● Teachers will meet at least once within a residency with the resident artist to debrief observations, curriculum and assess student learning. Paraprofessionals A residency can be anywhere from 4 to 12 weeks. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will invite families to attend day and evening sessions designed to engage families and staff in activities to foster relationships and a culture of collaboration in our school community. From the early onset of the academic school year, the Parent Coordinator plans and organizes a Family Day for families to engage socially and get to know each other. This event sets the tone for the school year and helps members of our community foster relationships. Instructional staff plan and schedule a learning share at the end of each unit of study. There are 4 learning shares in every grade starting in November and ending in June. Families are encouraged to visit different stations where students share all their knowledge and learning experiences within this unit of study. Some residencies may have their own share at the end of the program where families will be invited to join. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Staffing of cluster position ● Partnership with external organizations ● Purchasing of instructional materials such as, arts materials and supplies to support center work in the classroom. ● Allocating funds for substitute coverage ● Allocating funds for residencies to enhance the curriculum for all grades. ● Allocating funds for professional development through external vendors. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To ensure the collaboration between instructional staff and resident artists is ongoing, reflective and meeting our goals, teacher teams will engage in the following: • Work with resident artist to develop a curriculum to be implemented by classroom teacher once a week. • Units are mapped out in advance with dates for baseline assessments and performance tasks. • At least 6 teachers will have curriculum outlined after the second teacher professional development session. • Teachers will collaboratively plan a learning share as the culminating activity at the end of each unit. • Progress will be documented through baseline and end of unit performance tasks, exit slips.  Students and teachers will be provided surveys at the mid-point of a residency to determine effectiveness • Use information from multiple sources, data from tasks, surveys, self- reflections and exit tickets to monitor and adjust accordingly. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be documented through baseline and end of unit performance tasks, exit slips. Students and teachers will be provided surveys at the mid-point of a residency to determine effectiveness. Use information from multiple sources, data from tasks, surveys, self- reflections and exit tickets to monitor and adjust accordingly. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our Advance 2017-2018 data provided us with the following information regarding measures of teacher practice:  25% of the ratings were in the highly effective category, 70% of of the ratings were in the effective category and 5% of the ratings were in the developing category. The majority of the developing indicators were in Domain 3: Instruction. After careful analysis of data provided from staff feedback during grade meetings, end of year conferences and post-observation sessions, it is apparent that in order to build a true professional learning community and maximize on the strengths of our staff, teachers will share pedagogical strategies and teaching practices with peers so that higher levels of student achievement may be attained. The priority need is in Domain 3: Instruction with a focus on developing questioning and discussion techniques. As part of our observation cycles and feedback session, the focus will be on indicator 3B: Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques with a emphasis on the quality of questioning, discussion techniques and student participation, indicator 3C: Engaging Students in Learning and 3D: Using Assessment in Instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 90% of all teachers will receive end of year MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson Framework for Teaching components 3B, 3C,and 3D as measured by 2018-2019 end of year MOTP ratings in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate on grade level teams in observing and sharing feedback with a peer, using the Danielson Framework for Teaching, a minimum of four times across the year. Within these groups, teachers will engage in work around Domain 3 with a strong emphasis on 3b: Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques. In addition, teachers will meet with administrative staff to share thoughts on the process and progress during reflection meetings and mid and end of year conferences. Instructional and Administrative staff will meet during grade planning meetings and professional planning time to review Domain 3 Components and discuss expectations for Effective and Highly Effective Practices. In addition, study groups around professional texts such as Responsive Classroom Academic Choice to support improvement in specific indicators, the use of pre/post visit and classroom observation protocols to support effective inter-visitations and the generation of effective peer feedback on practice. The purpose of this work is to create a common understanding of the framework and its expectations and connections to improving student achievement. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers Sept.2018 through June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Sept.2018 through June 2019 Instructional Staff, Assistant Principal and Principal Classroom Teachers Cluster teachers Each grade team will create a year-long action plan as well as mechanisms to gather feedback on their work and structures to monitor their progress towards their goals. Each committee will be responsible for the planning, implementation and follow-up of the work of their team. Furthermore, teachers will be offered opportunities to share on the process and progress with the school learning community. Classroom Teachers Cluster Teachers Sept.2018 through June 2019 Instructional Staff, Assistant Principal and Principal (min. of two per year) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will attend monthly workshops facilitated by instructional staff, administrative staff and external agencies designed to promote active leadership and empower them to support their children at home. They will be provided with authentic learning activities and conversations techniques and strategies to engage their children in rich conversations. 2018-19 CEP 28  In an effort to increase parental involvement and leadership, at the culmination of each unit of study, families will be invited to participate in student led learning shares. Teacher teams will design and provide families with guiding questions connected to the topic of study to support rich and authentic conversations with students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. * Meet with teachers on grade teams and individually at the beginning of the school year to target a Domain 3 goal for the year. * Provide regular coverage periods to all teachers to observe each other. Provide additional coverage to teachers who observe during their preparation periods. * Schedule grade meetings to allow for further discussion of Domain 3 components and expectations in E/HE categories * Schedule professional development opportunities for staff to share process and progress of work. * Follow up on goal-setting in mid-year one-on-one reflection meetings with teachers * Collaborate with external partners to deepen work around Danielson Framework Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 90% of all teachers will receive at least 2 ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in at least 2 out of 3components (3b,3c, 3d), as measured by Advance observation reports for the period of September 2018 to February 2019, every teacher will have engaged in at least one cycle of inter-visitation and had at least two observations documented in Advance to measure progress in Domain 3 components. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Information gathered through conferences with individual teachers and grade teams, mid and end of year meetings, observations of teacher practice will be used to assess the process and monitor progress toward achieving the goal through the teacher development and evaluation system Advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has strong lines of communication with families which includes monthly progress notes, school website with class pages, regular email/phone/text blasts, newsletters, scheduled in-person or phone conferences every Tuesday, parent workshops, family learning shares in addition to the multiple opportunities to visit classrooms and meet with the teachers, administration and/or other school support staff members when requested. As evidenced in our 2017-2018 School Survey: ● 91% of families felt our school staff regularly communicates with them on how they can help their child learn. ● 92% of families surveyed strongly agree that our school gives them opportunities to visit their child’s classroom to observe and participate in classroom activities. ● 97% of families felt that they are greeted warmly when they visit or call the school ● 93% of families feel they are able to work closely with their child's teacher to meet their needs. ● 93% of families feel they are well informed by communication they receive from the school ● 97% feel they are respected by their child's teacher Priorty Need: Although our school provides workshops for families on a variety of topics, there is still an expressed need by parent members of the SLT for more information, particularly in regard to special education services as well as developing a deeper understanding of how our unique curriculum model impacts student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of the implementation of meaningful parent workshops, at least 90% of parents will respond positively to questions related to how the school provides suggestions and ideas to support them in helping their children at home, as measured by the 2018-2019 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ICT teachers, AIS/SETTS provider, service providers and Assistant Principal to plan at least one Family Workshop on ICT and Special Ed. Services for Families in Grades K-5. Families will be provided with information on how to further help their children at home with reading and writing strategies, building vocabulary, increasing sight words and strengthening fluency. All Families Grades K-4 Grade Teams will plan at least one literacy and one math interactive workshop for families in Grades Pre-K – 5 on understanding how we use inquiry and project-based approaches within our units of study and how to support students with disabilities. One workshop for each grade Pre-K -4 Tuesday Afternoon - Parent Engagement Time November 27th, 2018 Tuesday Afternoon - Parent Engagement Time ( 2 sessions) We share with families the Parent to Parent monthly meetings regarding special education support services across various sites on Staten Island. All Families Pre- K through Grade 5 Once a month from September 2018 through June 2019 Pre- K Social Worker will plan at least one parent meeting to support families with understanding the IFSP process and ways to support their students with disabilities at home. All Pre-k families January 2019 Department of School Health will be hosting two parent workshops, one on how to cope with anxiety specifically around testing and the other one will focus on Social-Emotional well being All Families Pre- K through Grade 5 1st Workshop January 2019 Special Education Teachers Special Education Liaison Administrators Parent Coordinator Classroom Teachers Special Education Liaison Administrators Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Pre- K Social Worker Pre- K Teachers Administrators Parent Coordinator Department of Health Administrators 2018-19 CEP 31 Workshop on Conflict verse Bullying (Outside Organization). How can families identify the difference and support their children on developing strategies for how to handle situations in school and at home. Parent Coordinator 2nd Workshop April 2019 All Families February Administrators 2019 Parent Coordinator Outside Organization 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The school will be creating a partnership with National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) and the JCC to provide a support program for families with information, insight, understanding and empowerment that deals with social-emotional issues and mental illness. Along with the support programs with NAMI and JCC, we will be also partnering with Personal Centered Care Services (PCCS) to offer families additional education supports and services available outside of the school day for children with IEPs. We will also be partnering with Illuminart Art Productions through their CASA grant to bring an afterschool program to PS 59. Illuminart Productions empowers students to utilize theater as a tool to write and perform plays that illuminate critical social issues, creating conversation for positive change. Through interactive workshops, Illuminart helps children develop literacy and math skills through the arts. Children participating in the program share their experiences with their families by inviting them to the school for art exhibits and performances. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ICT teachers, Service Providers and Assistant Principal to plan Family Workshop on ICT and Special Education   Classroom teachers on a grade to plan Family Workshop on our Instructional Approach in Literacy and Math  Per Session budget will be used to pay teachers for planning of Family Workshops, if applicable  Per Diem budget will be used to cover teachers for presentation of Family Workshops, if applicable Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of the implementation of meaningful parent workshops, at least 90% of parents will respond positively to questions related to how the school provides suggestions and ideas to support them in helping 2018-19 CEP 32  their children at home, as measured by a mid year, school-created survey, with similar questions from the NYC School Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of parents attending school-wide workshops, as measured by the Parent Coordinator Activity Report for the period of September 2018 to February 2019, compared to the number of parents attending school-wide workshops, as measured by the Parent Coordinator Activity Report for the period of September 2017 to February 2018. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● Teacher recommendation ● Fountas & Pinnell ● Work Sampling ●MOSL ●NYS ELA results ●Teacher recommendation ●Work Sampling ●MOSL ●NYS Mathematics results ●Classroom/Science teacher ●Work Sampling Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) One to one instruction, small group- 1:1, 1:3 During the school day as pull- out intervention. Pull-Out Intervention One to one instruction, small group-1:1, 1:3 During the school day as pull- out intervention. Pull-Out Intervention One to one instruction, small group-1:1, 1:3 N/A Targeted instruction designed to remediate skill, strategy and learning deficits of identified students (ie: Fundations, intensive instruction targeted toward students’ specific area of need. At risk students receive differentiated instruction using the following: a multi-sensory approach, the use of manipulatives, remedial math strategy/skills lessons. At risk students receive differentiated instruction using the following: a multi-sensory approach, science vocabulary scaffolds, and visual aids. 2018-19 CEP 34  Social Studies ●Completion of unit tasks ●Work Sampling At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ●Students performing 2 and below At risk students receive differentiated instruction using the following: a multi-sensory approach,domain specificvocabulary scaffolds, and visual aids. At risk students receive differentiated using the following: a multi-sensory approach, One to one instruction, small group-1:1, 1:3 N/A One to one instruction, small group- 1:1, 1:3 During the school day as pull- out intervention. Pull-Out Intervention 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Twelve Students Families and students identified during registration as living in temporary housing, will be provided with access to available resources within the immediate community and borough to ensure that the basic necessities and supplementary educational and counseling services are provided. In addition, the STH liaison will maintain records throughout the school year with ATS reports that include the names of students living in temporary housing situations and lists of services offered by the Title I, Part A mandatory set aside. The liaison will act as and advocate for families in the school and surrounding community. Families will also be provided with additional resources to ensure a successful academic year that includes start up book bag with supplies and materials to support the student's educational needs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In an effort to ensure the recruitment and hiring of highly qualified teachers a variety of strategies and activities were implemented. Teachers applied through Open Market and New Teacher Finder. A rubric aligned to Danielson's Framework was created by a committee consisting of the principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator and staff members. After careful review and evaluation, the candidate’s resumes and cover letters interviews were conducted through the 18-D Process. In addition to the interview, candidates are encouraged to bring artifacts that demonstrate best practices of their teaching experience and pedagogy. New teachers are provided support and guidance through the New Teacher Mentoring Program. Teachers are assigned to a grade based on previous experience, course of study, previous professional development and interest. Professional development is designed based on teacher observational feedback and team discussions. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Administrative and Instructional staff including paraprofessionals will engage in: ● Professional Development focused on the alignment of curriculum to the Common Core State Standards ● Inquiry Work through Impact teams - There is a specific focus on grade bands k, 1, 2 and 3, 4, 5 to improve math fluency and problem solving strategies. Our Special Education team is focusing on looking at trends in our special education population to determine academic interventions, adjustments to the curriculum and supports. We are using multiple sources of data to inform our work such as State Test Scores, MOSL and student work samples. ● Training on Work Sampling System Online (Assessment) ● Grade Planning meetings ● Partnership with community based organizations to create learning experiences outside of the classroom that support learning and enable students to meet the standards 2018-19 CEP 38  Administration receives professional development from the district. The principal and assistant principal attend monthly learning sessions with administrative peers and attend cohort meetings at individual schools to engage in inter-visitations with a focus on differentiated instructional practices. Some examples include how to improve student engagement within math problem solving and how our students with disabilities are being supported with differentiated tasks and instructional supports. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● We designed a Pre- k unit of study in collaboration with Bank Street Center for Emotionally-Responsive Practice entitled, Building Bridges that is introduced the last month of school. It provides students with many opportunities to engage in activities that prepares them for the transition to kindergarten. It includes reading stories, visiting classrooms, engaging in cooperative activities with kindergarteners and many more. ● Families are invited to attend a Stepping-Up ceremony where they participate in the sharing and celebration of the learning and transition to kindergarten. ● Incoming families are invited to attend our Family Day event. It is a day of getting to meet their teachers, other staff members, visit their classrooms, get to know other families and students in their classes and meet with representatives from local community organizations. ● Our school secretary assists families with the kindergarten registration process. She sends out reminders, makes appointments to meet with families or calls them to offer support. ● Our pre-k social worker meets with families and provides workshops to support the transition. 2018-19 CEP 39  4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Teachers are a regular part of the decision making process in our school. School surveys are provided to staff at the beginning, middle and end of year to evaluate the assessment practices being used. MOSL team meets in the beginning of the year to determine the measure for student learning for each grade. Decisions are made when meeting to design and align curriculum to meet our school goals and standards. They develop performance tasks with standard based rubrics aligned to the units of study. Our school believes in authentic assessment so the process for data collection is curriculum embedded and ongoing daily. ● We provide on-site professional development through a Learning Series on Work Sampling System. Teachers are involved in implementing a time-line for assessing students, how they collect their data and document, deciding how they use this information to improve practice and how they communicate information to families. There are school-wide consensus and we meet regularly to reflect and implement changes as necessary. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 40 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $152,499 0 0 0 $2,020,664 x n/a n/a n/a X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E n/a n/a n/a 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 41   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 59, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 59 The Harbor View School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 44  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 59 The Harbor View School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 CEP 45  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 47  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name The Harbor View School Borough Staten Island School Number 059 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carol Mongiello Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Vera Cangro Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Maria Cirillo/SETTS Related-Service Provider Caryn Matula Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Valerie Sanchez Coach School Counselor Parent Jessica Venditto Parent Coordinator Kristen Druda Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 139 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.00% 2018-19 CEP 50  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We currently do not have an ELL population attending our school however; if this were to change we would use Fountas Pinnell for all assessments of early literacy skills for our ELLs. We would also utilize teacher made assessments. Information from these assessments could help teachers stay focused, measure progress and plan for targeted instruction to support students in moving forward. If we had ELL students, we would administer the NYSESLAT exam once a year to assess the progress of the ELL population. The results of the LAB-R would be used to drive instruction. In addition, P.S. 59 would use the end of year benchmarks and the item analysis to determine ELA teaching points. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 51  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Not applicable 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. During the 2015 registration period, we did not have any family identify a language other than English on the Home Language Survey. The previous year data patterns in proficiency levels on the LAB-R revealed that students who had identified a language other than English on the Home Language Survey scored higher than the score which entitles Bilingual/ESL services. This signified that most of the children entering our school were already bilingual. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per the CR Part 154.2 , students in the Freestanding ENL program, Entering and Emerging students will receive 180 minutes of stand- alone English as a New Language service and 180 minutes of Integrated English as a New Language service. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL service and 90 minutes of either Stand-Alone ENL service or Integrated ENL in a content area. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA or another content area. Students in the ENL program are grouped homogeneously and heterogeneously. Groups also include students in two contiguous grade levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 CEP 52  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the event that we needed to deliver content and standards- based curriculum for the Freestanding ENL program model, we would make use of a pacing calendar, aligned with the Common Core State Standards. The ENL teacher would receive a copy of the curriculum and materials to tailor the instruction in order to support students’ content acquisition. The ENL teacher also would collaborate with classroom teachers enabling instruction to be delivered in the areas of Math, Science, Social Studies as well as ELA. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When students enter the NYCDOE school system for the first time and LAB-R eligibility has been established, the NYSITELL is then administered. Eligible students who are Spanish speakers are administered the Spanish LAB-R. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status All programs for ELLs must be aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. In other words, programs must use a balanced approach to literacy, including high-quality instructional practices that facilitate academic excellence for ELLs. Also, ELL materials used within ELL programs must be age- and grade-appropriate supporting ELLs in meeting the CCLS. ELLs in the advanced level of English proficiency also receive ELA instruction. In the event that Students with Interrupted/Inconsistent Formal Education (SIFE) become a part of our school, P.S. 59-The Harbor View School has a plan to ensure that their emotional and educational needs are addressed . Students will receive the mandated amount of ENL instructional minutes as per CR Part 154.2, according to their proficiency level. Additional ENL minutes may or may not be implemented, which will be at the discretion of the school and according to the needs of the SIFE student. Content standards and curriculum will be adapted to meet the challenges of SIFE students. Since SIFE students may come to school with emotional strain (i.e. as refugees, or without many of the necessary early skills such as reading or writing which can cause frustration in students) our School Based Support team (SBST) is prepared to be a part of any specific counseling that may be necessary. We also have a number of bilingual staff members at our school who have agreed to be a part of the supportive team for SIFE students (in the case that they speak the same language). SIFE students will also be paired with another student (the “buddy system”). Buddy system students will be paired from same NL groups when possible. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? PS 59will use curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWD to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by placing students in the same classes. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other content areas will align to the curriculum. An intervention teacher will work with our students with IEPs to perform direct, differentiated instruction to our intermediate ELLs. When necessary material is translated into other languages. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We are a new school with a gradual rollout of a grade a year. We currently have three pre-kindergarten classrooms, two kindergarten classrooms, two first grade classes and two second grade classes. We currently do not have students identified as ELLs in need of a targeted intervention program. 2018-19 CEP 53  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Upon review of the NYSESLAT results, determination will be made as to which students will receive English language support services and which students need transitional support services. As per the ELL Policy and Reference Guide, notifications are to be sent to parents no later than September 15. Documentation of these letters will be sent to parents and copies of each notification is kept in the main office. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Students identified as ELLs would be grouped with children in their grades with similar academic needs with a focus on specific areas of literacy. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials, including technology would be used to support ELLs: smart boards, lap tops, ipads, listening devices in mainstream classes. Students would also be provided with dual language dictionaries and glossaries to assist in language acquisition. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The home language will be supported through the use of classroom libraries. In addition, english would be used as the medium for classroom instruction and in the Free Standing ESL program. Native Language would be used with the teacher during specific moments when working with intervention of students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required service support and resources will correspond to ELLs ages and grades as they will be grouped by ages in their small group. Materials will be made available to correspond with each level of instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials, including technology would be used to support ELLs: smart boards, lap tops, ipads, listening devices in mainstream classes. Students would also be provided with dual language dictionaries and glossaries to assist in language acquisition. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently we do not offer any language electives at PS 59. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 CEP 54  Our school does not offer any dual language programs at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In addition to professional development for offered through the Office of English Language Learners, we would develop ways to incorporate more training for staff. Throughout the year we would offer in house professional development and meetings to disseminate information obtained at trainings to the staff. Paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologist, occupational therapist, physical therapist, speech therapists, secretary and administration would participate. As teachers engage in the Common Core Learning Standards they will receive training to help assist them in this transition. The schools provide on-site PDs as well as turn keying information presented in specific training sessions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We are a new school with a gradual rollout of a grade a year. We currently have three pre-kindergarten classrooms, two kindergarten classrooms, two first grade classes and two second grade classes. We will eventually grow until fifth grade. We realize that transitioning from elementary to middle school can be a challenging time. We will encourage our to families work with our guidance counselor to determine the best choices for their students. Orientations will include interpreters. Translators will provide to assistance with filling out the necessary paper work. Our staff members are encouraged to attend numerous conferences and professional development that address the needs of ELLs and/or other special need children in their classrooms. Our ESL teacher provides professional development (7.5 hours) to the staff to inform them of the needs and requirements for the ELL population. These workshops are given mainly in the begining of the year, with follow-up meetings throughout. Records are maintained for these workshops. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to regular parent teacher’s conferences, P.S. 59- The Harbor View School will hold annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs. The purpose of these meetings is to discuss the goals of the programs in which the students are placed. At these meetings, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs will be discussed. Parents will be invited to attend a face to face meeting. If parents are unable to attend, then a meeting will be held via phone calls. These meetings will take place during the parental involvement time. Additionally, meetings will be scheduled in advance to ensure the procurement of translators. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 59 is fortunate to have a strong parental involvement component. All parents, including parents of ELLs would be invited to volunteer and particpate in monthly activities including learning shares, art exhibits and parent meetings . Many parents currently assist with lunch in Pre-k andKindergarten. Parents are invited at the end of each unit to visit their children's classrooms to interact with them in their learning environment and students have the opportunity to share their learning 2018-19 CEP 55  experiences . Parents are invited to our annual art and music festival. Parents are also involved in maintaining the school’s community garden. At the end of the school year, all classes participate in an end of year ceremony. All families are invited to take part in this celebration. Additionally, parents are involved in the PTA . Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 56 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carol Mongiello, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Th School DBN: 31R059 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Carol Mongiello Title Principal Valerie Sanchez Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Leticia Collins Parent Tara Tranchina Teacher/Subject Area Anthony Lodico Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 7/27/15 7/27/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 7/27/15 7/27/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 58  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R059 School Name: The Harbor View School Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. PS 59- The Harbor View School distributed the Language Preference Survey created by the NYCDOE (available on the NYCDOE website) to every child’s parent in order to assess our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs and to ensure that parents are provided with information in a language they can understand. Surveys were completed and the data was compiled. In addition to the surveys, teachers also lend information that they’ve learned about the language in which parents prefer to communicate through parent interviews, meetings, conversations, etc. The parents' language of preference is also indicated on the child's blue emergency card, as well as the Home Language Identification Survey. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 59  Language English and Spanish Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Handbook Parent_Teacher Conferences Student Narratives Letters from teachers and school leadership School Announcements (Invitations to events such as learning shares, performances and workshops) 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences- November 4 &5, March 2&3, May 12th Curriculum Night- September 17th interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 60  Open School Week- November 16- 20 th Every Tuesday afternoon 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 59 fulfills Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification for translation and interpretation services in the following ways: • Important documents are translated and sent home with children at the beginning of the year and in a timely fashion throughout the rest of the school year. • Our school provides services such as translation, assistance, welcoming, and kindness to parents in need of language access services in order to ensure that they are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 59 distributes a parent survey twice a year to gather feedback on existing programming and services. The information gathered in through this survey is analyzed and aggregated by the administrative staff and members of the instructional staff and P.T.A. In addition, our school implements an open door policy which encourages our families to communicate regularly with administrative and instructional staff to provide feedback and suggestions. 2018-19 CEP 61 
