2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 31R062 31R062 Principal: LISA SARNICOLA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Kathleen Grimm School for Leadership and Sustainability at Sandy Ground 353100010062 Pre-K through Grade 3 School Number (DBN): 31R062 644 Bloomingdale Road Staten Island, NY 10309 718-668-8640 718-668-8645 Phone Number: Lisa Sarnicola Fax: Lsarnic@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Lisa Sarnicola Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Annemarie Summa Jessica DePetro (Co-President) & Jacqueline Funez (Co-President) Parents’ Association President: Annemarie Summa/Jessica DePetro SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jacqueline Funez N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 31 VincenzaGallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island, NY 10301 Superintendent’s Office Address: VGallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: 31 Executive Director’s Office Address: Kevin Moran Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island, NY 10301 KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-556-8367 Phone Number: 718-556-8375 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lisa Sarnicola Annemarie Summa Jessica DePetro Celeste Paesano-Vitale Laura Chernoff Lauren Whalen *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Linda Cintron Caterina DeLuca Maria Montagna Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Nancy Petrone-Przybyszewski Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our School Mission is as Follows: PS 62 is a stimulating learning environment in which our team of dedicated and highly-trained staff, together with the support and partnership of parents and families, provides quality education in a well-resourced building which addresses the individual needs of our students. Each day, we will seize the opportunity to build creative problem 2018-19 CEP 9  solvers and analytical thinkers. We are equally committed to developing and nurturing the whole child to ensure that they become compassionate leaders who can make a positive difference in society. At PS 62, we believe that every child has a unique gift and something special to contribute to their community. In addition, as we create and sustain strong partnerships, and nurture relationships, with various community organizations, “real world” experiences will further enhance the academic and social development of every student. The PS 62 community will strive to grow leaders in sustainability. Together, we will lead change in society from being wasteful energy consumers to efficient energy conservationists. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our Core Values are: Compassion : We learn to show compassion through being kind and considerate and showing concern for the well-being of others. As compassionate individuals, we believe that everyone has something valuable to offer and understand that no one likes being left out or misunderstood. We understand and accept the differences that make each of us unique and special. We embrace those differences! We are also active listeners and listen with our minds and hearts so that we can truly understand others. Teamwork : We believe that “Together is better”. Teamwork is the process of working collaboratively with a group of people to achieve a common goal and come up with the best possible solution. When we work collaboratively, members of the group can use their individual strengths in order to better the outcome and achieve the goal set, at the highest level possible. When working together as a team, we learn to respect differences, get along well with others and learn from one another. Leadership : As leaders we all do what is right even when no one is looking. Leaders lead through their words and their actions, and take risks when necessary. They make positive choices that impact themselves and the people around them. Leaders make plans, set goals, and benchmark until their final goal is met. Curiosity : We believe that curiosity is the key that propels our students to question and explore the world around them. Curiosity and creativity foster the inquiry process and the desire for individuals to learn new things and seek solutions to problems. Inquisitiveness enhances engagement and enthusiasm and allows individuals to be amazed with their newly acquired knowledge. Perseverance: At times we are confronted with challenges. However, we believe in ourselves and never give up. We work through the adversity to complete tasks and achieve success. We embrace productive struggle to further develop our “growth mindset” and explore the endless possibilities regarding the world around us. PS 62 is an Elementary school that opened its doors during the 2015-2016 school year. The school opened up with one full day Pre-K section and 3 Kindergarten sections. Each year after, a new grade was added. This year, PS 62 added grade 3 classes. PS 62 currently has 284 students in grades Pre-K through grade 3. Our demographics consist of 11.74% Hispanic, 4.62% Asian, 1.06% Black, 80.78% White, and 1.06% Multi-Racial. 50.18% of the students are males and 49.82% of the students are females. Last year our attendance percentage for the year was 94%. PS 62 is a unique school in that it is a Net Zero school, the first in all of New York State. As a Net Zero Energy school, our school will make as much energy as we use. PS 62 has approximately 2,000 solar panels that make electric energy from sunlight. Our school uses electric energy, or electricity, to power lights, computers, the heating and air conditioning, and anything else that gets plugged in. It is important that we as a school community are always working not to waste energy. We keep track of how much energy we make and how much energy we use for a full year 2018-19 CEP 10  through classroom monitoring and small competitions across the grades. At the end of our Net Zero Energy year, if we have made at least as much energy as we used, our school will be a Net Zero Building, which is a goal of our school! PS 62 is a “Leader in Me” School where we work hard to not only meet students’ educational needs but also their social needs. Students are taught the 7 habits and how to unleash their unique talents. Students are proactive members of the community and are encouraged to apply for jobs, both inside and outside the classroom. Students have opportunities to participate in teams throughout the school, such as, a Student Lighthouse Team, and the Green Team. Students also work hard to create and track both academic and personal goals through Leadership Notebooks. The staff members are also life-long learners who value extensive professional development that is differentiated and provided by both the school and outside organizations. Teachers also set , track and create new goals once goals are achieved. This is done through professional conversations with the principal. We are an inclusive community and work hard to create partnerships between the school and the home. Parents are invited to workshops, classroom events, school-wide events, performances and trips on an on-going basis. We have partnerships with outside community organizations. We currently have partnerships with , Road Runners, GrowNYC, and Garden to Cafe. Each partnership serves as a resource or extension to our school day and will allow students to build content knowledge and provide students with hands-on learning opportunities. Students will also have access to our Green House, Bike Room, a track, Block Room, and Science Lab to ensure that curriculum comes to life in a meaningful way that students can connect to. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In Pre-K through grade 3, 13.73% of students are SE and 1.42% of students are ENL. A special student population at PS 62 are students that have IEPs. Students require Team Teaching settings, 12:1:1 Settings, Related Services and at times, small group instruction. Supports and scaffolds are provided to the students in order for them to access the General Education curriculum. Scaffolds are removed when students no longer require them. Students also benefit from a multimodality approach to learning. Therefore, teachers plan lessons that support different learning modalities. We also have 4 ENL students that range from Transitioning to Commanding. Students are from various countries of origin such as China, 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school made the most progress in the areas of Effective School Leadership, Strong Family Community Ties and Trust. In Effective School Leadership, our growth was .31 moving from a 4.49 to 4.80. In Strong Family Community Ties, our growth was .64 moving from a 4.06 to a 4.70. In regards to Trust, our growth was .25 moving from a 4.50 to 4.75. We attribute this to the school's open door policy, the addition of family events and the collaboration between administration, staff and families. A major focus throughout the year will be to ensure that we are meeting the needs of all students in the school community, inclusive of English Language Learners and Students with Special Needs. Throughout the year teams will meet to look at student work and review data to identify grade level trends and gaps. As a team, we will plan next steps based on clear success criteria in order to meet the demands of the CCLS and the performance tasks. We will modify curriculum and customize instruction to ensure that students are engaged and thinking critically. We will then benchmark and ensure that the strategies implemented are rendering student performance and progress. This work will not be done in isolation. Teams will be meeting weekly, professional development will be provided, sharing of best practices will occur and Instructional Rounds into colleagues’ classrooms will take place. Parents and families will also play an active role in this work by taking part in school level teams, attending curriculum sessions, and being active members in creating learning plans/goals for their individual students. Lastly, parents have and will continue to have an opportunity to become Reading Volunteers, which includes specialized training on how to support the school and student achievement. This is an area of focus because we moved from a 4.93 to a 4.76 in Supportive Environment. 2018-19 CEP 11  2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R062 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 213 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 1 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 27.0% % Attendance Rate 24.9% % Reduced Lunch 1.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.0% 8.0% 83.6% % Multi-Racial % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 5 5 12 94.7% 2.8% 17.4% 0.9% 5.2% 2.3% 0 0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In September 2018, P.S. 62 will be adding Grade 3, a rigorous testing grade. Students will be applying all concepts, skills and strategies learned throughout their school career to achieve great success in the academic areas of English Language Arts and Mathematics. An expectation at P.S. 62 is that high standards are set in every classroom and all students meet grade level benchmarks. Through customized instruction, our students will be actively engaged in ambitious intellectual real-world activities, while further developing their critical thinking skills. Through the utilization of multiple entry points, standards based learning will be accessible for all learners. Our goal is to create a curriculum that exposed students to test sophistication, perseverance, close reading, deepen comprehension and opportunities to annotate and explain their thinking logically. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will implement CCLS curriculum with multiple entry points providing a rigorous learning environment for all students as measured by by 80% of the students meeting or exceeding a level 3 as measured by the New York State English Language Arts Examination. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Impact Team Meetings : Impact Teams will meet on various Mondays using protocols to look at student's mock examinations and reading tasks in order to plan lessons and modify curriculum to meet the needs of all students. Team members will also create scaffolds and supports for both students and families so that both students and families are aware of next steps. Progress Monitoring : In the academic area of English Language Arts, mock exams will be administered to all students in Grade 3. Data will be analyzed by teachers and administrators. Students will be targeted based on areas of need and flexible grouping between the two classes will occur. Guided Reading and strategy groups will be conducted on an on-going basis to meet the needs of all students. AIS will also be provided for students who are not making adequate process. Test Sophistication Classes: Test sophistication classes will be offered on Saturdays to further prepare students for the Grade 3 ELA examination. Students will learn test-taking skills and strategies to achieve academic success on The New York State ELA examination. AIS: Provide at-risk services to students who are below grade-level expectation at various points of the year. Small groups will be serviced and the focus will be on strategy and skill development. The strategies and skills will be based off of text indicators, the CCLS standards and identified individual gaps. Rigorous Professional Development Plan: Professional development will be provided to teachers and paraprofessionals on an ongoing basis. The professional development plan will be crafted after careful analysis of data, after observation cycles, and through needs addressed by the staff. PD sessions will include, creating clear success criteria for lessons, assessment opportunities in regards to formative assessment, questioning and discussion techniques, creating lessons aligned to the CCLS with multiple entry points, and a study on text level indicators, to Students in Grade 3 September 2018 Administration and Teachers through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 December 2018 through March 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Administration and Teachers Administration, Teachers and Administration and Teachers Administration and Teachers Students in Grade 3 Students Students Teachers and paraprofessionals 2018-19 CEP 15 just name a few. Additionally, the staff will engage in multiple book studies throughout the year (ex. "Leading Impact Teams" and "Leaders of their own Learning". 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home by doing the following: * Holding Curriculum Conferences in September and May- Teachers and Administration * Parent Teacher Conferences in November and March- Teachers and Administration * Open School Week to visit classes and see instruction in November- Teachers and Administration * 'Shift Parent Letters' that provide clear examples and expectations for families 6 times throughout the year- Administration *Progress Reports that are distributed with tools and resources (in between report cards) in January and May- Teachers and Administration * Monthly Newsletters with curricula expectations that are distributed monthly- Teachers and Administration * Parent Meetings scheduled as needed- Teachers and Administration * Parent Workshops on Test Sophistication and how to decrease anxiety during testing * Parent Workshops based on parent surveys, curriculum and the CCLS done on a bi-monthly basis- Teachers and Administration Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Teachers meet with their grade colleagues on Monday and Tuesday afternoons in order to engage in the Inquiry Team process, Impact Teams, and professional development sessions as part of their official work hours. ● Teacher teams meet throughout the school year to develop lessons and modify curriculum to meet the needs of all students. Substitute coverage and per session, for teachers and supervisors, will be provided from Fair Student Funding and Tax Levy Vision for School Improvement funds. ● Fair Student Funding will be used to pay for our AIS teacher. ● The Test Sophistication Saturday Program will be self-sustaining. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 16  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The following mid-point benchmarks will occur: ● By February 2019, School-made (using prior State Examinations) Mock Examination data will be analyzed to assess student achievement and progress in English Language Arts to ensure that 80% of the students are on track to meeting our goal of meeting benchmark standards by the end of the year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Mock Examinations, School-made (using prior State Examinations) will be used to assess progress. The data will be collected through an item analysis that is standards specific. This will be conducted in February. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? At PS 62 we pride ourselves on building assessment capable learners and empowering students to be in charge of their own learning. Therefore, if teachers provide daily opportunities for students to take ownership of learning intentions, success criteria, learning progressions and peer and self reflection, then students will be empowered, self-directed learners that can articulate their next steps and reflect on their learning. Based on our reading and math MOSL data students have shown great success with meeting benchmark standards. As a growing school we need to ensure that this continues throughout grade 3 and in the content area of writing. For each of the 7 units we do a pre and post assessment and we use the Writing Pathways in order to assess their level of proficiency. Our goal is for students to take ownership of their learning and progress with the support of tools, learning progressions and success criteria in order to reach a level 3 or 4. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of students will show progress (Moving up a proficiency level) or mastery (level 3 or level 4) in all CC writing pieces (7 units) as measured by Writing Pathways: Performance Assessments and Learning Progressions. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Impact Team Meetings : Impact Teams will meet on various Mondays using protocols to look at student's Writing pieces in order to plan lessons and modify curriculum to meet the needs of all students. Lucy Calkins Units of Study and Writing Pathways will be utilized when planning curriculum mapping and lesson planning. Team members will also create scaffolds and supports for both students and families. To engage the families, the scaffolds and supports created will be shared with them so that there are clear expectations and next steps. School-wide Planning: Teachers will plan and implement lessons that explicitly model the writing learning progression, as well as have tools to support students. Lucy Calkins Units of Study and Writing Pathways will be utilized when planning curriculum mapping and lesson planning. Teachers will also create and implement success criteria and plan for assessment opportunities so that students can peer and self assess, reflect and set actionable next steps for themselves. Students will then be taught how to use all the tools that are available to them in order to be self-directed learners that are in charge of their own learning. Parents as Partners Workshops: Parents and families will be invited to Parent Workshops in which they will be engaged in learning around the CCLS in writing. Parents will also be taught how to use writing strategies that their children are using in school. The administration and staff will provide parents with resources and tools in order to bridge the home-school connection. Leadership Notebooks: Students will have individual Leadership Notebooks where they can develop their leadership skills, create goals and track progress in writing for each unit of study. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Staff and Students September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Staff and Students Staff and Students September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Staff and Students Parents/Families September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 All students Administration and Teachers Administration and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 19  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home by doing the following: * Holding Curriculum Conferences in September and May- Teachers and Administration * Parent Teacher Conferences in November and March- Teachers and Administration * Open School Week to visit classes and see instruction in November- Teachers and Administration * 'Shift Parent Letters' that provide clear examples and expectations for families 6 times throughout the year- Administration *Progress Reports that are distributed with tools and resources (in between report cards) in January and May- Teachers and Administration * Monthly Newsletters with curricula expectations that are distributed monthly- Teachers and Administration * Parent Meetings scheduled as needed- Teachers and Administration * Parent Workshops based on parent surveys, curriculum and the CCLS done on a bi-monthly basis- Teachers and Administration Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Materials were purchased (binders/dividers/ paper/sheet protectors) for our Leadership Notebooks out of our New Schools Allocation. ● Teachers meet with their grade colleagues on Monday and Tuesday afternoons in order to engage in the Inquiry process, Impact Teams, and professional development sessions as part of their official work hours. ● Teacher teams meet throughout the school year to develop lessons and modify curriculum to meet the needs of all students. Substitute coverage and per session opportunities will be provided for administration and teachers from Fair Student Funding and Tax Levy Vision for School Improvement funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 20  The following mid-point benchmarks will occur: ● By February 2019, 90% of students will show progress or mastery in 3 CC writing pieces (3 units thus far) as measured by Writing Pathways: Performance Assessments and Learning Progressions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student work that is assessed using the Writing Pathways: Performance Assessments and Learning Progressions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 62 prides ourselves on collaboration and reflection. Based on MOTP data for the 2017-2018 school year, 46% of our teachers fell within the Effective range, 39% of our teachers fell within the Highly Effective range and 15% of our teachers fell within the Developing range. Additionally, as a growing school PS 62 will be gaining 5 additional teachers for this school year. On the 2017-2018 Quality Review we received Well Develops in all indicators. In 4.1 we received a Well Developed in Observing teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. However, since we are a growing school with new staff members, we want to ensure coherence and consistency across grades and the school. Additionally, all of my staff fell within the Effective and Highly Effective range in the end-of-year MOTP ratings. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have successfully incorporated best practices and strategies shared in professional development workshops and observation feedback sessions resulting in an effective or highly effective rating as measured by the Danielson Framework for Teaching in all Domains. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional Development: Teachers will have an opportunity to meet on Mondays and engage in PD sessions based on patterns and trends from Danielson observations. Teachers will also be given opportunities to conduct intervisitations into colleagues' classrooms in order to observe best practices in all Domains Instructional Rounds : Administration and teachers will engage in cycles of Instructional Rounds with a focus on Domain 3 (3b, 3c, and 3d). During this time we will take low inference observations, norm, identify best practices and create actionable next steps that will increase student performance and enhance teacher pedagogy. Observations with Administrative Feedback: Administration will observe teachers based on their selected option and then meet with teachers within 48 hours to provide verbal feedback that is grounded within the Danielson Rubric and addresses the various subgroups within the classroom, inclusive of ELLs and SWDs. During the feedback session, the teacher will have some time to reflect on their pedagogy using the Danielson Rubric and then be provided with actionable feedback from an administrator. During this time, tools and resources will also be shared to move instruction and improve teacher pedagogy. Professional Goals: The administration will work with teachers to craft 3 goals at the beginning of the school year. Each teacher will be required to create one goal around component 3d; assessment. Together we will create an action plan for each goal, determine how we will monitor progress and determine how we will know if we accomplished each goal. Mid-year, the administration and teachers will meet to benchmark the 3 goals to make necessary adjustments and at the end-of the year we will meet to reflect on all 3 goals. Parents as Partners Workshops: Parents and families will be invited to Parent Workshops in which they will be engaged in learning around the standards, Instructional Shifts, curricula expectations and ways that they can support their child at home in regards to rigorous instruction. The administration Teachers Teachers Teachers Administration and Teachers Administration and Teachers Administration and Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Teachers Administration and Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Parents/Families September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, Teachers and External Presenters 2018-19 CEP 23 and staff will provide parents with resources and tools in order to bridge the home-school connection. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaboration in order to support their children at home by doing the following: * Holding Curriculum Conferences in September and May- Teachers and Administration * Parent Teacher Conferences in November and March- Teachers and Administration * Open School Week to visit classes and see instruction in November- Teachers and Administration * 'Shift Parent Letters' that provide clear examples and expectations for families 6 times throughout the year- Administration *Progress Reports that are distributed with tools and resources (in between report cards) in January and May- Teachers and Administration * Monthly Newsletters with curricula expectations that are distributed monthly- Teachers and Administration * Parent Meetings scheduled as needed- Teachers and Administration * Parent Workshops based on parent surveys, curriculum and the CCLS done on a bi-monthly basis- Teachers and Administration Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Teachers meet with their grade colleagues on Monday and Tuesday afternoons in order to engage in Impact Teams, Patterns and Trends Meetings and professional development as part of their official work hours. ● Journeys was purchased for our ELA curriculum out of Tax Levy funds and GoMath was purchased for our math curriculum out of NYSTL funds.  Teachers visit colleague’s classrooms during the school day in order to engage in Instructional Rounds. Substitute coverage will be provided from Fair Student Funding and Tax Levy Vision for School Improvement funds.  Teachers voluntarily meet with administrative staff to engage in feedback sessions around their observations  as well as their individual goals. As teachers reflect, they use the Danielson Framework. Substitute coverage and per session opportunities will be provided for administration and teachers from Fair Student Funding and Tax Levy Vision for School Improvement funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 24  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The following mid-point benchmark will occur: ● By February 2019, 80% of teachers will increase by one rubric level or a rating of effective/highly effective as measured by Advance in all Domains. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Danielson Framework and the Advance System. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After careful analysis of the data that was collected through the Advance system for the 2017-2018 school year, the data revealed that 62% of teachers fell within the Effective range in component 3d, 23% of teachers fell within the highly effective range in component 3d, 15% of teachers fell within the Developing range in component 3d . We have done major work in this component during the past three school years and it will remain a focus for the 2018-2019 school year so that all teachers can strive to reach or remain in the Highly Effective range; ensuring that students are taking ownership of their own learning. Additionally, with the addition of new staff this year, we need to ensure that they are meeting the expectations and procedures that are currently in place at PS 62. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, assessment will fully be integrated into instruction, students will take ownership of their own learning and students will provide quality feedback to their peers as measured by 90% of teachers being rated as Effective or Highly Effective in their MOTP Advance rating in component 3d. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Observations with Administrative Feedback: Administration will observe teachers based on their selected option and then meet with teachers within 48 hours to provide verbal feedback that is grounded within the Danielson Rubric and addresses the various subgroups within the classroom, inclusive of ELLs and SWDs. During the feedback session, the teacher will have some time to reflect on their pedagogy using the Danielson Rubric and then be provided with actionable feedback from an administrator around component 3d. During this time, tools and resources will also be shared (continuum, learning intentions, success criteria, technology, etc.) to move instruction and improve teacher pedagogy in component 3d. Instructional Rounds : Administration and teachers will engage in cycles of Instructional Rounds with a focus on component 3d. During this time we will take low inference observations, norm, identify best practices and create actionable next steps that will increase student performance and enhance teacher pedagogy. Rigorous Professional Development Plan: Professional development will be provided to teachers and paraprofessionals on an ongoing basis around component 3d, assessment. The professional development plan will evolve after careful analysis of data, after observation cycles, and through needs addressed by the staff. Action plans will also be crafted based on Advance data trends. Professional Goals: The administration will work with teachers to craft 3 goals at the beginning of the school year. Each teacher will be required to create one goal around component 3d; assessment. Together we will create an action plan for each goal, determine how we will monitor progress and determine how we will know if we accomplished each goal. Mid-year, the administration and teachers will meet to benchmark the 3 goals to make necessary adjustments and at the end-of the year we will meet to reflect on all 3 goals. Impact Team Meetings : Impact Teams will meet on various Mondays using protocols to look at student's work in order to plan lessons and modify curriculum to meet the needs of all students so that they can become assessment capable learners. Team members will create scaffolds and supports for students to Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Administration and Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers Administration and Teachers Administration and Teachers Administration and Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Administration and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 27 be able to engage in self and peer assessment practices. Clear next steps and actionable feedback will also be discussed during these Impact Team Meetings so that a plan can be put into place for individual and groups of students to meet their academic needs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home by doing the following: * Holding Curriculum Conferences in September and May- Teachers and Administration * Parent Teacher Conferences in November and March- Teachers and Administration * Open School Week to visit classes and see instruction in November- Teachers and Administration * 'Shift Parent Letters' that provide clear examples and expectations for families 6 times throughout the year- Administration *Progress Reports that are distributed with tools and resources (in between report cards) in January and May- Teachers and Administration * Monthly Newsletters with curricula expectations that are distributed monthly- Teachers and Administration * Parent Meetings scheduled as needed- Teachers and Administration * Parent Workshops based on parent surveys, curriculum and the CCLS done on a bi-monthly basis- Teachers and Administration * Train parent volunteers to come into classrooms to support teachers and students. Additionally, at the same time parents will be observing best practices from teachers so that they can support their children at home when doing homework and assignments * Parents will be part of school-level teams, such as but not limited to; SLT, Safety, Lighthouse Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers voluntarily meet with administrative staff to engage in feedback sessions around their observations. As teachers reflect, they use the Danielson Framework.  Teachers voluntarily meet with administrative to create goals, meet mid-year to benchmark and meet at the end of the year for a final reflection.  Teachers attend professional development sessions on Mondays after school as per the UFT contract and professional development opportunities will be provided at other times throughout the school year both 2018-19 CEP 28  internally and externally. Substitute coverage will be provided from Fair Student Funding and Tax Levy Vision for School Improvement funds.  Teachers visit colleague’s classrooms during the school day in order to engage in Instructional Rounds. Substitute coverage will be provided from Fair Student Funding and Tax Levy Vision for School Improvement funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The following mid-point benchmark will occur: ● By February 2019, 75% of teachers will receive at least one highly effective rating in component 3d between September 2018 and February 2019, as measured by Advance observation reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Danielson Framework and the Advance System. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 62 opens a new grade each year until we matriculate to Grade 5. As a newer school, gaining a new grade each year, creating strong family-community ties will be an integral part of our development. By utilizing not only resources from the outside community but also the unique resources within our school building, we will work towards creating a welcoming, supportive and inclusive environment where we can work together through a true partnership to meet the needs of all students and to cultivate the individual talents and strengths of our students. As per the School Learning Environment Survey for the 2017-2018 school year, 96% of parents/guardians responded that they have the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. (Q4a) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will create a welcoming and inclusive environment to families as measured by 98% of parents stating that they had the opportunity to support their school as per the Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Parents as Partners Workshops: Parents and families will be invited to Parent Workshops in which they will be engaged in learning around the standards, Instructional Shifts, curricula expectations and ways that they can support their child at home in regards to rigorous instruction. The administration and staff will provide parents with resources and tools in order to bridge the home-school connection. At the end of each workshop, parents and families will have an opportunity to fill out a survey to rate the effectiveness of the workshop. Parents and families will also be asked to identify workshops of interest/need which will enhance relevance and increase engagement and participation. Orientations and Teacher Led Workshops : Parents and families will be invited to orientation sessions where they will learn about curriculum, meet staff members and be provided with resources and ideas to support their child’s progress in meeting the standards. Teachers will also provide workshops to parents on various Tuesday afternoons as a way to bridge the home-school connection and provide parents with activities and ideas that will foster student progress and performance. Parent-Teacher Meetings and Tuesday Parent Engagement Sessions Parents and families will be invited to parent-teacher meetings and also during Tuesday’s parent engagement time to discuss student progress and performance. During these times, teachers will discuss current levels of performance and create plans to ensure that students continue to progress along the continuum. Student work will be shared and resources will be provided to parents. New for this year, planning will be strategic in order to merge both school events and PTA events in order to increase attendance at PTA events. School and Classroom Events : Parents and families will be invited to school and classroom events throughout the school year to celebrate student’s success and build a stronger school community. Parents and families will be invited to take part in events such as, publishing parties, portfolio day, Parents/Families September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, Teachers and External Presenters Parents/Families September 2018 through June 2019 Administration and Teachers Parents/Families September 2018 through June 2019 Teachers and administration Parents/Families Students September 2018 through June 2019 Administration and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 31 leadership events, staff vs parents sporting events, performances and ceremonies. Parents will also be trained by an outside organization so that they volunteer in the school throughout the year. Core Wellness: Staff and parents will form a committee that will focus on embedding 'brain breaks' that relate to our Core Values and Growth Mindset paradigms. This will ultimately support the holistic development of each child while cultivating real-world 21st century skills. Parents/Families Students Health and Fitness Initiative: Families will be invited to school events specifically around health and fitness. There will be healthy eating workshops offered as well as literature sent home from partnerships, such as, Garden to Café. Parents/Families Students Administration, Staff and parents Administration and Teachers September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. New York Center for Interpersonal Development Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Parents as Partners workshops will take place during and after school hours to accommodate parent’s schedules. ● Teams that consist of both parents and school staff will be held during and after the school day. Substitute coverage will be provided from Fair Student Funding and Tax Levy Vision for School Improvement funds. ● Classroom and school events will be held during and after the school day. Substitute coverage will be provided from Fair Student Funding and Tax Levy Vision for School Improvement funds. ● Parent orientations and teacher lead conferences will occur during the evening sessions and during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time. ● Parent-Teacher Meetings will be held 3 times a year and meetings with families will be held during the Tuesday Parent Engagement sessions. ● A committee will be formed to support the implementation of our Core Wellness inititative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 32  The following mid-point benchmarks will occur: ● By February 2019, at least 90% of parents/families will respond positively to a school-created survey with questions related to being included in the school environment with opportunities to support the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A school-created parent survey with comparable questions from the School's Learning Environment Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) F&P data, running record data, writing assessments, tasks, teacher-made assessments, Success Criteria, WritingContinuums class work, homework “Share and Show” in each mini-lesson, unit assessments, tasks, teacher-made assessments, Success Criteria, Math Continuums, class work, homework Rubrics aligned to Learning Outcomes, class work, homework, class participation Rubrics aligned to Learning Outcomes, class work, homework, class participation Low inference observations, family request, teacher requests, guidance requests Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Orton Gillingham, Interactive Writing, Guided Reading Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and one-to-one During the school day Re-teach lessons from Go Mathwhile providing scaffolds, alternate strategies, hands-on manipulatives and modeling Provide additional scaffolds to meet the content standard, vocabulary support, use of visual supports Provide additional scaffolds to meet the content standard, vocabulary support, use of visual supports 7 habits lessons, creation of BIPs, small group play, role play, brain breaks Small group and one-to-one During the school day Small group and one-to-one During the school day Small group and one-to-one During the school day Small group and one-to-one During the school day 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  PS 62 will provide the following services for the STH population; 1. Academic support 2. Parent Involvement programs 3. Basic emergency supplies The money set aside will assist students in temporary housing in meeting the State's challenging academic content and academic achievement standards, as well as assisting them when they have urgent needs. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. PS 62 received $3,065 for students in temporary housing. This money is used to purchase materials for identified students so that they have the necessary tools for school. 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 38  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 39   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 62, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 62 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 42  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 62, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2018-19 CEP 43  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 45  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Staten Island District 31 School Name School of Leadership and Sustainability School Number 062 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lisa Sarnicola Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jennifer DeSantis /ENL Teacher/Subject Area Anna Mousouroulis/Special Ed. Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Michelle DiMassi Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal N/A Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent Jacqueline Funez Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member Kevin Moran Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 48  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 199 Total number of ELLs 4 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.01% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 62 will be using Fountas and Pinnell to assess early literacy skills of our ELLs. Data obtained from Fountas and Pinnell will provide insight into ELLs reading levels inclusive of early literacy skills and comprehension. It also allows for appropriate grouping when conducting guided groups. For math P.S. 62 will be using MOSL and Go Math Formative assessments. This data helps inform our school’s instructional plan by determining if the students are on grade level or if they need remediation to reach grade level. Students also engage in a 'share and show' during each math lesson so that teachers can group students accordingly based on immediate data. In addition to the Fountas and Pinnell, MOSL and Go Math formative assessments, teachers are also conducting informal running records and teacher observations to monitor progress and guide instructional planning. Teachers also use 'plickers', Socratic Seminars and Exit Slips as another means of formative assessment. In regards to writing, students engage in 7 units aligned to the CC Learning Standards. Each unit starts with a pre-assessment so that 2018-19 CEP 49  teachers know what supports need to be put in place for each student, as well as areas that students are proficient in so that they can be pushed. Each unit ends with a post assessment in order to assess mastery of the content that was mastered in that unit of study. All formative or curriculum embedded-assessments will guide instructional planning for ELLs and meet the demands of CC Learning Standards. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? At P.S. 62 school leadership ensures that the staff is implementing the structures that meet the needs of ELLs. Upon returning to the new school year the ENL teacher obtains the NYSESLAT results to see who will be continuing to receive ENL services. We also begin NYSITELL testing right away to determine which new students will be receiving ENL services as well. The ENL Teacher meets with the teachers to share data and discuss areas of strength and needs (ex: listening, speaking, reading and writing). School leadership provides common planning time for the classroom teachers so that they can work closely with the ENL teacher to review data to guide instructional planning. The data helps inform our school's instructional plan by determining if the students are on grade level or if they need remediations to reach grade level. We must determine what best practices worked well with our ELL students and what parts of our curriculum need to be revised to better meet the needs of our ELLs. RTI, AIS and differentiated groups are created based off of the data from the formative assessments to support the needs of the ELLs. Teachers also meet vertically and horizontally and look at student work using protocols during Impact Team Meetings. During this time, clear next steps are created as well as supports for future lessons. Student work will also continue to be reviewed at this time so that we can continue to adjust the curriculum based on learning gaps and instructional gaps that are revealed in the data. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success of programs for ELLs are evaluated by formal and informal assessment. Writing pieces and reading levels are used to informally assess student growth. Fountas and Pinnell is used to formally assess early literacy skills of our ELLs. Data obtained from Fountas and Pinnell will provide insight into ELLs reading levels inclusive of early literacy skills and comprehension and allow teachers to measure progress and identify areas of need. It also allows for appropriate grouping when conducting guided groups. Math Beginning of the Year assessements are administered, benchmarked mid -year and then assessed again at the end of the year through the End of Year assessment. Go Math formative assessments and MOSL are formal assessments used to measure students progress in Math as well as identify areas of needs. The NYSITELL is also used to assesses the language proficiency of ELLs. The results of NYSITELL will help teachers plan the best program for students based on his or her strengths and needs in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in English. Additionally, the NYSESLAT modality breakdown is used to annually assess the English language proficiency level of ELLs/determine if a program is successful. If a student is lacking in a particular modality the program may need more instructional support in that specific area. This is when the classroom teacher and ENL teacher use ENL teaching strategies and incorporate other instructional materials to aid in the student's success. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Data is analyzed on an ongoing basis through teacher teams and through the data specialist. Once data is analyzed, individual and group plans are created for students and/or groups of students. Appropriate interventions include creating instruction that is linguistically and culturally responsive. This means that instruction and interventions must consider and build upon a student’s cultural background and experiences as well as their linguistic proficiency (in both English and the native language). Student’s prior experiences, home language background, and socio-cultural background are considered. A review of the student’s socio-cultural background should address culturally and linguistically-based issues of motivation and the student’s prior knowledge of the material being learned or studied. Teachers will consider the relationship between the student’s language proficiency and his/her literacy skills. Reading fluency and comprehension may be strongly determined by vocabulary comprehension and linguistic proficiency in both the first and second language (Slavin & Chung, 2003). Linguistic proficiency and vocabulary comprehension are looked at when collecting data and measuring math skills. Vocabulary comprehension has been identified as a major variable in the understanding of math concepts (Kemp & Partyka, 2009). The first form of RTI for students is in the classroom. Scaffolds are put into place and students are put into re-teach groups in order to remediate areas of need. If this is not successful, students are given AIS or At-risk related services. Parents are also an intregal part of the process. Teachers and administration meet with parents to give them resources so that they can continue 2018-19 CEP 50  the work that is being done in school, at home. During this time strategies are shared so that parents feel supported and comfortable with working with their children at home. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 62 uses the Journeys Program for Response to Intervention (RTI) for reading. Journeys has an RTI identification component built into the assessments that focuses on language and literacy development. These assessments allow us to provide supplemental and supportive instruction to our ELLs. RTI groups are formed based on which students did not master the lesson. RTI strategies are used to ensure that instruction is adjusted to meet the needs of ELLs. For writing P.S. 62 has created writing units that correlate to the NYS Learning Standards. Student work will be analyzed based upon the writing continuum and next steps will be created accordingly based on students’ needs. Groups will be created to refine and expand their competencies, and to help them acquire the academic writing skills they need in the content areas. To support students in listening and speaking we provide them with core instruction that promotes oral language development, rich in both language and content. Students are given many opportunities throughout the day to engage in discussions with their peers. During this time, students are grouped in triads or partnerships that will support our ELLs. Also during this time, supports are given to foster rich discussions. Supports include, sentence stems, discussion prompts, question prompts, rubrics and visual aides. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After accessing NYSESLAT scores, teachers and school leadership conference to make any accommendations and adjustments that would need to be made to ELL students' programming. NYSESLAT Targets of Measurement documents describe what students should be able to do at each grade band level, linked to specific targets of measurement and their linguistic purposes. Resource files are provided by each modality and are incorporated into instruction to aid in students success. Both teachers and school leadership will use this resource to ensure their instruction and formative assessment are aligned with these targets. Teachers and school leadership will meet during inquiry and impact team meetings to examine the results of the NYSESLAT to identify trends and and use that to inform our instruction. NYSITELL data will also be used to inform our instruction, identify students for RTI and provide information on individual student strengths and needs. All teachers and school leadership will support ELLs as they acquire content knowledge while also progressing towards English proficiency. Our ELL programs ensure that all students meet the high demands of NYS Learning Standards. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teacher Teams meet regularly to look at student work and data. During this time student work is reviewed to identify areas of strength and need. Then as an outcome, lessons and units are revised based on the learning gaps and instructional gaps that are revealed in the students work. Additionally, resources are added into current programs to fill the gaps. For instance, last school year when looking at student work we saw that students were struggling with writing about how they solved math problems. As a team we asked "what kind of supports can we have in place to support our students in writing about problem solving?" Both teacher teams and school leadership worked together to create a new math continuum, a problem solving plan and exemplars so that students can reference as they worked through writing about math. Individualized math word walls with pictures were placed into students math tool kits to support students writing. From there Professional Development opportunities are created based on needs in order for adjustments to be made to the curriculum and teacher pedagogy. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 2018-19 CEP 51  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL services are provided as a combination of integrated and standalone based on CR-154 -2 requirements. NYSITELL and NYSESLAT levels of proficiency are used to determine the amount of integrated and standalone minutes an ELL student will receive. P.S. 62 only has a Freestanding ENL program at this time due to low ELL enrollment. The freestanding ENL program is taught with a certified TESOL/ENL teacher and an integrated model is co-taught by the ENL teacher and certified common branch teacher. The students are programmed according to the CR-154-2 mandates based on NYSITELL and NYSESLAT levels in the following proficiency levels: entering (Stand-alone 180mins, integrated ENL 180mins), emerging (stand-alone, 90min, integrated 180mins, and flexibility of 90 in either integrated content area or stand-alone depending on the students need), transitioning (integrated core content 90 min or 90 min of flex either stand alone or integrated ENL depending on need), expanding (integrated core content 180 min.), and commanding (integrated ENL or core content for 90mins for two years after passing the NYSESLAT). Students are grouped based on their grade or NYSITELL/NYSESLAT proficiency level; P.S. 62 only has kindergarten, first and second grade at this time. No more than two grade levels can work together at one time. In each of the grade levels, the students have been placed in the same classroom to maximize ELL support from the ENL teacher. During a push-in model, ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher using ENL methodologies in teaching to meet the needs of the ELL students. As discussed above, push-in/pull out services are provided by certified English as a New language teacher. This teacher is certified in multiple areas including TESOL, General & Special Education and Literacy. The certified trained teacher provides instruction in English using ENL methodologies and scaffolding. In order to maximize English acquisition for the ELL’s, the ENL teacher and classroom teacher teach in an integrated approach through a co-teaching model. The teachers coordinate their efforts to provide instruction during ELA blocks as often as possible. Based on the new CR part 154-2 students will be grouped only within two consecutive grade bands. b. TBE program. If applicable. At this time P.S. 62 does not have a TBE program due to lack of parental request on the Home Language Survey. c. DL program. If applicable. At this time P.S. 62 does not have a DL program due to lack of parental request on the Home Language Survey. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? P.S. 62 follows the new CR part 154-2 mandates for instructional minutes delivered in each program. In accordance with the English as a New Language (ENL) program all students are serviced based upon their proficiency level. Students programs will differ based on the minutes they require with stand-alone service, integrated ENL and flexibility in programming. All staff, including administration, classroom teachers, and service providers are aware of their ELL’s proficiency levels that determine their instruction. ENL services are provided as a combination of integrated and standalone models based on CR-154 -2 requirments . During the time the ENL teacher is in the classroom, they are working collaboratively with the classroom teacher to provide the scaffolding ELLs need to better understand the curriculum. The ENL teacher will work with small groups to make sure students receive core content area and English language development instruction, including the use of the home/primary language as support and appropriate ELL instructional supports to enrich comprehension. P.S. 62 only has a Freestanding ENL program at this time due to low ELL enrollment. The freestanding ENL program is taught by a certified TESOL/ENL teacher and the integrated model is co-taught by the TESOL/ENL teacher and certified common branch teacher. The students are programmed according to the CR-154-2 mandates based on NYSITELL and NYSESLAT levels in the following proficiency levels: entering (2 units of study: Stand-alone 180mins, integrated ENL 180mins), emerging (2 units of study: stand-alone, 90min, integrated 180mins, and flexibility of 90 in either integrated content area or stand-alone depending on the students need), transitioning (1 unit of study: integrated core content 90 min or 90 min of flex either stand alone or integrated ENL depending on need), expanding (1 unit of study: integrated core content 180 min.), and commanding (integrated ENL or core content for 90mins for two years after passing the NYSESLAT). Administrators have a copy of the ENL teachers schedule ensuring the students are being serviced properly as per CR-Part 154-2. 2018-19 CEP 52  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. P.S. 62 currently has an ENL Program model. English is the language of instruction in the ENL Program model. Students receive core content area and English language development instruction, including the use of the home/primary language as support and appropriate ELL instructional supports to enrich comprehension during both integrated and standalone sessions. ELLs are given bilingual glossaries to support content areas in their native language. Content areas such as social studies and science are incorporated into literacy, mathematics, technology, and art whenever possible. Teachers often collaborate to teach units to develop a cohesive learning environment for students and increase their depth of knowledge. The ENL teacher reinforces content with the students through the use of visual aids, vocabulary, manipulatives, and additional materials as needed based on NYS Learning Standards. Students are also given opportunities throughout the day to engage in discussions with their peers. During this time, students are grouped in triads or partnerships. Also during this time, supports are given to foster rich discussions. Supports include, sentence stems, discussion prompts, question prompts, rubrics and visual aides. Students are also given opportunities to fishbowl so that they can observe quality discussions. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are usually evaluated in English; however, in the future ELLs in grades 3-5 will be evaluated in their Native Language for the New York State Math assessment if they choose not to take the Assessment in English. In addition, Spanish speaking ELLs are evaluated using the Spanish Lab-R if they scores below the NYSITELL cut score. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a.Under the new CR Part 154, a student with Inconsistent/Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) shall mean English Language Learners (ELLs) who have attended schools in the United States (the 50 States and the District of Columbia) for less than twelve months and who, upon initial enrollment in such schools, are two or more years below grade level in literacy in their home language and/or two or more years below grade level in Math due to inconsistent or interrupted schooling prior to arrival in the United States (the 50 States and the District of Columbia) [154-2.2(y)]. SIFE students are closely assessed to identify where the gaps in their learning are. As their instruction as been interrupted, inconsistent, and sometimes unavailable, SIFE may have complex social and psychological needs due to possible traumatic migration experiences, frustrations with their academic delays in relation ot their peers, a lack of familiarity with school culture, and feelings of isolation in school. The SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire provides an opportunity to learn more about the student, family, home background, educational history and literacy practices. The Questionnaire collects critical information on each student including variables such as age upon arrival, mobility, and years of schooling at time of entry into an English language school system in New York State. Differentiated instruction will be needed for SIFE students with lessons modified for them based on their needs.b. Newcomers that have been in a U.S. school less than three years are taught the CCLS modified to their English proficiency. Oral language, phonics, and vocabulary are strongly enforced for newcomers and reinforced in the classrooms. Newcomers will be exposed to Orton-Gillingham (O.G.) strategies provided by classroom and ENL teacher to ensure continuity. O.G. is a highly structured program introduced the idea of breaking reading and spelling down into smaller skills involving letters and sounds, and then building on these skills over time. It also pioneered the “multisensory” approach to teaching reading. Teachers use sight, hearing, touch and movement to help students connect language with letters and words.c. Developing ELLs will be monitored closely and may be candidates for mediation with the Response to Intervention (RTI) model. Orton-Gillingham strategies will be applied to the students as needed to increase and further the development of their English skills. The students should be assessed often to identify areas of growth and areas to be improved. Lessons aligned to the CCLS build from the information they have not mastered.d. Long-term ELLs need to be monitored closely and may be candidates for mediation such as the Response to Intervention (RTI) model. These students may be bilingually evaluated to determine if language or a disability is impeding their ability to reach English proficiency. If the student has an IEP, the differentiation is based on the student’s goals. 2018-19 CEP 53  The student should be assessed often and lessons should build from the information they have not mastered aligned to the CCLS within their IEP goals. Lessons also scaffold to support students and maintain their language strategies for reading, writing, listening, and speaking. The lessons are modified for the student to better understand grade level and complex texts.e. Former ELLs still receive ENL service for two years after the pass the NYSESLAT. They will also receive test modifications for up to two years after passing the NYSESLAT. They are also monitored closely by their classroom teacher; the ENL teacher provides 90 minutes of weekly integrated support to former ELLs and works closely with the classroom teacher. Former ELLs are often placed in a classroom with current ELLs, so the ENL teacher is easily accessible to them within the integrated model. The ENL teacher will monitor and support ongoing English language development and academic progress by providing former Ells with the support they need within the classroom. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The Journeys program provides ELL components for most lessons that teachers follow for reading, ELL components are also built into the writing continuum. The ENL teacher will also meet with classroom teachers weekly to discuss planning for ELLs. Teachers of ELL –SWD’s are trained and aware they must use ELL strategies such as but not limited to, repeating directions and instructions (up to three times), rephrasing instructions and directions, providing students with individualized word wall with illustrations, using visuals aids, and technology to help scaffold instruction and accelerate English Language development for academic content areas. Students are also given opportunities throughout the day to engage in discussions with their peers. During this time, students are grouped in triads or partnerships that will support our ELL-SWDs. Also during this time, supports are given to foster rich discussions. Supports include, sentence stems, question prompts, rubrics and visual aides. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Journeys and Go Math both provide RTI models to ensure that curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility allowing diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. ELL-SWD’s lessons and instruction are modified by the classroom and ENL teacher to achieve their IEP goals. Small groups are immediately based on formative assessment data and the lesson is retaught to support students. All staff, teachers and paraprofessionals engage in professional development and Professional Leaning Communities to improve delivery of instruction to ELL-SWDs. All staff is shown the best practices for supporting ELL-SWDs, including how to use sentence stems, question prompts, rubrics and visual aides. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Interventions are used with students who do not master skills and are below grade level, including ELLs, ELL-SWDs, SWDs and struggling students. At this time P.S. 62 has ELL students in grades K, 1, and 2. Our reading program Journey's, has a range of interventions. It has tier 1 and 2 interventions, as well as specific interventions for ELLs. In addition, the program provides ELL components to use with each lesson. Go Math also has ELL components that are used as interventions with ELLs. Our targeted intervention programs are an RTI model, Academic Intervention Service (A.I.S.), Differentiated Groups and Orton-Gillingham (OG). A.I.S. is delivered by certified and trained staff in a small group setting. Differentiated Groups are formed in the classroom throughout the day and provide students with strategies to assist in learning. The OG is delivered by certified or trained staff in small groups and whole class. All intervention programs are offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? P.S. 62 is moving away from Fundations and will be implementing Orton-Gillingham (OG) school-wide. Orton uses sight, hearing, touch and movement to help students connect language with letters and words. The OG program puts a strong emphasis on understanding the how and why behind reading. Teachers have been sent for training and additional training will occur. P.S. 62 also has an Orton certified teacher on staff that provides professional development and supports staff during planning. Data obtained by both formal and informal assessments shows that O.G. is helping our ELL students with letter-sound relationship as well as providing the "how" and "why" behind reading. Data showed once students know consistent 2018-19 CEP 54  rules and patterns of the English language taught through O.G., they're better able to decode words on their own. P.S. 62 is also moving away from DRA-2 and will be implementing Fountas and Pinnell to assess early literacy skills of our students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? P.S. 62 is a new school with grades K-2; therefore, there were no prior programs in place to be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. P.S. 62 offers equal access to all school programs to ELLs such as science, social studies, greenhouse, O.G., art, dance, The Leader in Me, Movement and Gym. Through NYCID clubs students have access to a special art, sports and drama programs. Students also take part in our healthy eating program, Gardens to Café. The teachers ensure that ELLs are participating in all activities and programs, by modeling and scaffolding for students to understand how to participate. ELLs parents are made aware of all programs and their child's vital participation. Language is not a barrier for participation and inclusion at P.S. 62; ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. After school programs include NYCID After School Program where children are assisted with homework and have the opportunity to play gym activities and create art projects with their peers. There are many P.T.A. sponsored events throughout the school year for ELL students including; assemblies, pumpkin picking, holiday fair, book fair, Valentine's day dance, Mother's day craft, Father's day craft and a carnival. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Various instructional materials are used to support ELLs. ELLs are exposed to materials such as hands-on manipulatives, visual aids, pictures, glossaries, multimedia, demonstrations, interactive word walls, books aligned to their level as well as adapted text. Technology is used through Smart boards with computer based interactive lessons for literacy, math, science and social studies. ELLs also have access to laptops and Ipads which promote interactive learning through technology. P.S. 62 also has a school messenger system and a school web-site that are always viable resources for ELLs to access school information in their native language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in P.S 62’s ENL program by the use of content area glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, visual aids multimedia and technology. In addition books are provided in the student’s native language to support literacy at home. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teacher, service providers and classroom teachers collaborate to best support our ELLs. Often classroom teachers and service providers will share materials to reinforce a lesson through different points of entry. All teachers of ELLs are all aware of the age, grade level, and language proficiency, so they can best assist ELLs in reaching language proficiency and IEP goals. All resources used are grade and age appropriate in order to effectively support our ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 62 is not a co-located site. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). From the first day of school, the entire staff at P.S. 62 is there to welcome both parents and students into our school community. At this time P.S. 62 has no parent coordinator. The ENL teacher is there to guide new ELL parents with any questions or concerns they may have about their child or the school. During the first week of school is Meet the Staff/Curriculum Conference night where parents can get met their child's' teacher. The teacher will go over the curriculum for the grade they are entering, as well as provide them with resources so they can assist their child at home. During that night new parents will get a tour of the school and meet the rest of the P.S. 62 staff including school administration, office staff, service providers, cluster teachers, and the guidance counselor. If translation services are needed, we gladly contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit for over the phone interpretation services. When our ELLs reach 5th grade, school 2018-19 CEP 55  administration, the ENL teacher, classroom teacher and guidance counselor will meet with both parents and students to help them prepare for middle school. We will go over middle school expectations and address any other concerns parents or students have about the middle school they will be attending. They will have the opportunity to take a tour of the middle school they are entering as well as meet the staff. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language Electives are offered to ELLs at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? At this time, P.S. 62 does not have a Dual language program due to parental request on Home Language Survey. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? P.S. 62 will provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English Language Learners. A minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. For the ENL teacher a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners.  The ENL teacher will also collaborate with school administration, service providers, teachers and the guidance counselor to share best practices gained from PD sessions. Any information obtained at a P.D will be turn-keyed to staff on Monday afternoons during Professional Development sessions. Some topics for PD sessions will include Ortan Gillingham, close reading, unpacking priority standards, sharing of best practices to ensure an entry point into the lesson as well as whole language. There is a PD calendar that outlines these PD sessions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P.S. 62 provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of ELLs. All teachers are aware that 15% of professional development must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. For the ENL teacher a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. All teachers keep a PD log of all PD that is monitored throughout the year by the principal. The principal keeps a binder that includes the professional development plan for the year, followed the by agenda, and attendance sheets for each PD session. 2018-19 CEP 56  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 62 provides each parent with an annual individual meeting to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This will be done during the parent involvement time that has been allotted on Tuesday afternoons. During this time translation will be provided to parents based on their preferred requested language as per their HLS and request. All information will be translated as needed by means of using the NYCDOE website and switching the the parents HL on the top of the website screen, using over the phone translation services, or by using the Language Interpretation and translation services to attain translated documents as needed and to secure interpreters. Attendance sheets will be kept on file. If a parent is unable to come in person a telephone conference will be conducted and the meeting will be logged in the parent engagement tracking sheet that is provided by the school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 62 provides a vast amount of opportunities for parents, including parents of ELLs. P.S. 62 offers various parent workshops, in many areas including, but not limited to, early reading intervention, ELA and Math skills, the Leader in Me, and unpacking the NYS Learning Standards. Moreover, P.S. 62 is actively involved with “Learning Leaders”. A reprehensive from Learning Leaders comes to P.S. 62 for a parent support based workshop to implement training to parents in order to help their child and other children within the school with reading, writing, and math skills. Learning leaders are often assigned to students identified as at-risk. There are many school events throughout the year that encourage parent involvement such as, publishing parties, child performances, Halloween parade, holiday fair, book fair, parent/child sweetheart dance, Mother's day craft, Father's day craft, family carnival and Kindergarten graduation. P.S. 62 has a P.T.A. that encourages all parents to join and participate in meetings and school events. Translation and Interpretation services will be provide for any parent that needs it . Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. P.S. 62 is a new school that opened its doors in September 2015. There is currently one pre-k class, three kindergartens, three first grades and two second grades. P.S. 62 is the first Net-Zero School in the Department of Education. Students will be learning about sustainability and energy conservation. P.S. 62 has partnered with the Leader in Me in order to meet the social and emotional needs of all students. 2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lisa Sarnicola, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Leadership and Sustainability School DBN: 31R062 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lisa Sarnicola Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Jennifer DeSantis / ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jacqueline Funez Parent Anna Mousouroulis/Special Ed. Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Dennis McConville School Counselor Anthony Lodico Kevin Moran Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 9/25/17 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R062 School Name: P.S. 62 Superintendent: VincenzaGallas The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (Jennifer Dianne DeSantis Alvaro ENL Teacher ENL Teacher No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS) are assessed and a list is created identifying all parents’ written and oral language. This information is also available by running a report in ATS. All written forms are translated in the parents preferred language as needed. Language Line will be used with limited English proficient parents either over the phone or when they come to the school to provide the best mode of communication that the parent or guardian understands. At the beginning of the school year, classroom teachers, support staff and all other school employees are made aware of any parents who prefer a language of communication other than English. Staff is informed on how to use Language Line for oral communication. In addition all student emergency contact cards list parents’ written and oral language as well to inform all school staff if needed. 2018-19 CEP 60  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English 99.9% English 99.9% At this time P.S. 62 has 99.9% of parents that indicated their preferred written or oral language is English. At this time P.S. 62 has two parents that indicated their preferred written or oral language is Mandarin. Chinese .07% Mandarin .07% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. P.S. 62 will use the Intranet for translated P.S. 62 will follow Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 that requires documents produced by central DOE offices and schools, which 2018-19 CEP 61  contain critical information regarding a child’s education that is translated into the covered languages. Documents containing critical information are translated including, but are not limited to, the following areas: Standards and Performance  Registration, application and selection.  Parent Handbook   Conduct and discipline    Entitlement to public education or placement in any special Safety and health, Special education and related services education, English language learner or non-standard academic program  Transfer and discharge Legal or disciplinary matters   Parent-Teacher Conferences  Daytime and Evening School Events  Parent Learning Environment Survey versions of most commonly used letters, formats and applications. We will also utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit to help obtain translated documents, with understanding that sufficient time is needed to translate such documents. Translations into non-covered languages will be obtained from qualified contracted vendors. Sept.-June Sept.-June Sept.-June 2018-19 CEP 62  Sept.-June Sept.-June Sept.-June Sept.-June Sept.-June Sept.-June Sept.-June Sept.-June March 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-19 CEP 64  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school ELL Parent Survey and Program Agreement Conference September, 2018 Parent Orientation Parent Teacher Conference September 17, 2018 plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Translation and Interpretation services will be provided to parents if they require or request language assistance. The Language Line will provide a great way for limited English proficient parents to communicate with their child’s teacher as well as all school staff. On-site interpretation services through the DOE’s contracted vendor will be provided to parents as needed as well. 2018-19 CEP 65  Parent Teacher Conference Conferences/Expectations for Future Grades November 15, 2018 March 14, 2019 May 16, 2019 Translation and Interpretation services will be provided to parents if they require or request language assistance. The Language Line will provide a great way for limited English proficient parents to communicate with their child’s teacher as well as all school staff. On-site interpretation services through the DOE’s contracted vendor will be provided to parents as needed as well. Translation and Interpretation services will be provided to parents if they require or request language assistance. The Language 2018-19 CEP 66  Line will provide a great way for limited English proficient parents to communicate with their child’s teacher as well as all school staff. On-site interpretation services through the DOE’s contracted vendor will be provided to parents as needed as well. Translation and Interpretation services will be provided to parents if they require or request language assistance. The Language Line will provide a great way for limited English proficient parents to communicate with their child’s teacher as 2018-19 CEP 67  well as all school staff. On-site interpretation services through the DOE’s contracted vendor will be provided to parents as needed as well. Translation and Interpretation services will be provided to parents if they require or request language assistance. The Language Line will provide a great way for limited English proficient parents to communicate with their child’s teacher as well as all school staff. On-site interpretation services through the DOE’s contracted vendor will be provided to parents as 2018-19 CEP 68  needed as well. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, classroom teachers are always carrying student emergency contact cards. This ensures that parents can be easily contacted in the event of an emergency. Inside the folder teachers will have a copy of the Language Line phone number as well as the school's DBN code. This will allow them to reach their students' families who have limited English proficiency. The ENL teacher as well as additional school support staff will be on hand to assist teachers in reaching families in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Through Professional Development all staff members will be made aware the Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. They will understand that as a school we must ensure that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. Staff members will be made aware of how they can use the Intranet to obtain translated versions of most commonly used letters, formats and applications. It will be explained how the Translation and Interpretation Unit can translate other important documents that are needed to send home to parents. Teachers will receive a copy of the Language Line phone number as well as the school's DBN code. A tutorial will be given on how to use the Language Line to reach their students' families who have limited English proficiency. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 69  P.S. 62 has a Welcome Poster in various languages informing parents of language translation and interpretation services that is visible when entering the school building. The security guard also has a language ID guide and an "I can speak card". The main office has translated Parents' Bill of Rights, as well as Language access guides, and Language ID I can speak cards. Translations and interpreters are secured as needed through Language Line or on-site. At the beginning of the school year a letter will be sent home welcoming parents and inviting them to a parent teacher meeting for English Language learners. There they will receive information on how they can go onto the Department of Education Website to find helpful links for families of English Language Learners as well as the Bill of Rights for parents of English Language Learners. All information is available for viewing in the home language of the parent. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P.S. 62 will use parent surveys when needed to gather information regarding the quality and availability or translation and interpretation services. One way P.S. 62 has implemented the feedback we received from limited English proficient parents is by having all members of our staff utilize the Language Line to better communicate with parents. A step-by-step guide for how to use the Language Line set up by the phone in the main office so all staff can view it before making their phone call. 2018-19 CEP 70 
