2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R069 School Name: P.S. 069 DANIEL D. TOMPKINS Principal: DOREEN MURPHY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Daniel D. Tompkins 353100010069 Elementary 144 Keating Place 718- 698-6661 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 31R069 718-698-1903 Fax: Doreen E. Murphy Dmurphy2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Doreen E. Murphy Lori Cortese Michelle Rijo Salvatore Manuele N/A N/A N/A District Information Anthony Lodico Superintendent: 750 Ocean Terrace ALodico@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: FSC: 31 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Kevin Moran Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 52 Chambers St. New York, NY 10007 KMoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-374-4254 Phone Number: 718-556-8375 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Doreen E. Murphy Lori Cortese Michelle Rijo Salvatore Manuele Teresa Rossi SuetlanaKatyrchera *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Assistant Principal Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) NajlaKhass Marsha Ho Christine Russello Aimee Tecchio Jennifer Devino Christine Johnson Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Public Schools 69’s Mission Statement 2018-19 CEP 9  THE P.S. 69 COMMUNITY WORKS AS A TEAM TO ENSURE THE ACADEMIC, SOCIAL, AND EMOTIONAL SUCCESS OF OUR STUDENTS BY CELEBRATING THE MULTIPLE INTELLIGENCES OF OUR LEARNERS. WE BELIEVE IN NURTURING THE GIFTS AND TALENTS THAT EACH CHILD POSSESSES AS THEY JOURNEY THROUGH ELEMENTARY SCHOOL. STUDENT-DRIVEN LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS PROMOTE ACADEMIC RIGOR, AS WELL AS A SENSE OF INDIVIDUALITY AND EMPOWERMENT TO ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF OUR DIVERSE LEARNERS. ALL CHILDREN ARE ENCOURAGED TO MEET THEIR GOALS EACH AND EVERY DAY AS THEY BECOME "ANCHORED IN EXCELLENCE." The Foundation of our Philosophy is built upon Redesigning, Rebuilding, and Reclaiming our School Community 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 69 is a mid-island, elementary school located in New Springville on Staten Island. Our population of 938 students (44.8% females and 55.2% males) consists of: Asian: 16.0%, African American: 2.2%, Hispanic: 22.2%, White: 57.7%, 1.8% other: Special Education: 26%, English Language Learners: 12.9%, 54.4% of students receiving free lunch, and 1.1% os students residing in temporary housing. We pride ourselves on a 96.6% attendance rate. The Public School 69 Community serves a diverse population of students. Each grade level has an Integrated Co-Teaching Class. There are Horizon programs for children who are on the Autism Spectrum on third and fifth grade. Our school also houses ASD Nest Program which is a "Micro Integrated Co-Teaching Model" that services the high functioning autistic children alongside their typically developing peers. Public School 69 houses a "gifted and Talented Program" that services grade fourth and fifth. P.S. 69 will continue to offer a Pre-Kindergarten class. We are proud to offer an Intensive Kindergarten Program. With such a diverse population, programs have been developed to fully meet the needs of all of our students. Children who may benefit from these programs are selected based on relevant data. With the recent Special Education Reform, these programs have been proven to be effective for our school community, as everyone has the opportunity for remediation or enrichment. Public School 69 takes part in the School Wide Enrichment Model. This program addresses individual learning styles, interests, and modalities of all students. The students and teachers are given the autonomy to choose the area that most interests them. This choice nurtures a talent that students feel confident in and provides a foundation in this talent, allowing them to recognize their strengths. This program boosts student’s confidence and self-esteem by impacting their involvement/participation in all instructional activities across core curriculum areas. The inclusion of content areas (ex; Sciences and Arts) in the SEM program offers enrichment and further learning in subject areas. Our SEM has progressed from individual groups per grade level to groups that consist of multiple grades. Example: K-2 groups and 3-5 groups. With the establishment of a learning environment that focuses on inquiry and true reflection, thus formulating new questions, students are engaged and are encouraged to stir their curiosities in the life science, earth science, and physical science settings. By offering a challenging hands-on approach that is aligned to the New York State and City Scope & Sequence, CCLS, and ReadyGen Program, science teachers incorporate the Foss learning modules and other interactive technologies. Children are exposed to laboratory experiences, which offer them the opportunity to ask questions, make predictions and develop solutions. In it’s sixth year, our Character Education Program will implement and utilize the Stanford Harmony Program to provide a cohesive structure for behavior expectation school-wide. These behavioral supports will further enhance 2018-19 CEP 10  the quality of the school culture and instructional core throughout the entire school. The use of the voice scale, to monitor intonation is implemented school-wide. This unified visual approach is used to monitor voice tone, reflecting in improved behavior management practices. The P.S. 69 Community also follows the “Problem Scale”, which allows children to self-reflect and problem solve daily issues. The use of both scales will result in more responsible and prepared students. Occupational therapists provide professional development to staff members regarding sensory integration throughout classrooms for all learners. Strategies and visuals are provided and are placed strategically throughout the building to support students’ self-regulation and their ability to fulfill tasks. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Demographics 12.19% ELL 26% Special Education 54.4% Free Lunch 2.2% African-American 22.2% Hispanic 57.7% Caucasian 16.0% Asian 1.8% Other Our students have learning and emotional challenges. We have the ASD Nest Program, Horizon Classes, and Bridge Classes to support students academic, social, and emotional needs. Our Speech and Occupational specialists work collaboratively with general and special education teachers to provide differentiated strategies that support various learning needs of our student population. We also have a ESL coordinator and ESL teachers who provides instructional support for our ENL students. Our special education population also needs support in organization and developing life skills. Many of our special education students also receive Adaptive Physical Education to support with their physical needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school continues to reclaim and strengthen family ties with our parent engagement. The Public School 69 website has proven to be a very successful tool, which allows us to get information out to parents. The ROPESS (Reaching Out To Parents Ensure Student Success) team meets weekly to brainstorm different ways to support parent engagement. One example of this is our “A.P.P.S.” brochure. This brochure is used as an incentive to increase family involvement. We are finding that while this initiative is successful and parents are participating more frequently, it is still a work in progress and an area of focus for our school. With the adoption of the Harmony Program children and parents are encouraged to get involved in various functions such as: “The Character Education Pizza Social”, this event honors 2018-19 CEP 11  students who exhibit the quality character traits within each unit of study on all grade levels. All family members are invited to attend this event and embrace these qualities both at home and in school. The Public School 69 Community serves a diverse population of students. We currently support 206 students with classifications of autism, emotional disturbance, hearing impairment, intellectual disability, learning disability, other heath impairment, speech and language impairment and traumatic brain injury across all 49 of our classroom. These classroom span grades Pre-K through 5. Out of those 49 classrooms, 17 are general education classroom and 49 are special education classrooms. We currently have 2 Integrated Co-teaching Classroom in all grades Kindergarten through 4th grade and 3 in 5th grade. Our ASD NEST Classrooms, which are "Micro Integrated Co-Teaching Classrooms," service children on the ASD Spectrum alongside their typically developing peers. There are 2 NEST Classrooms on each grade, with the exception of the 5th grade which has 3. We have one 12:1:1 bridge classroom for students in Kindergarten through 2nd grade, one 12:1 bridge classroom for students in 3rd and 4th grade and another 12:1 classroom for student in 4th and 5th grade. We currently house one Horizon classroom for students in the 5th grade on the Autism Spectrum and one Gifted and Talented classroom 5th grade students. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R069 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 935 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 3 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 57.0% % Attendance Rate 50.9% % Reduced Lunch 11.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 20.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 55.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.09 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 51.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 19 19 20 94.5% 6.4% 26.1% 1.9% 19.8% 2.0% 4 2% 8 52.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  After analyzing the data through ADVANCE, it was evident that our teachers demonstrated an inconsistency with their approach to engaging students in math discussion. - In an effort to increase teacher performance in mathematics, teacher will are participating in professional development on the subject to ensure instruction is differentiated and hands-on, with a focus upon discussion. As indicated on the 2017-2018 New York State Mathematics Assessment, currently 48% of students at PS 69 are at a level 1 and 2 in mathematics; 52% are demonstrating proficiency. This data reveals the need for student instruction focusing upon problem solving as the center of math learning and concepts taught through real world hands-on experiences. Students will also be held accountable to justify their thinking both verbally and written.  Teacher feedback from the School Survey shows the need for more professional learning opportunities in mathematical practices and discourse. - Lead Teacher will work collaboratively with Math and Focus consultant. Algebra For All consultant will observe teachers, report feedback, design and facilitate Professional Development sessions. Professional Development will train teachers on the philosophy and implementation of Algebra For All the goal to enhance teacher practice and increase student learning.  Teacher feedback from the School Survey shows the need for more professional learning opportunities in meeting the needs of our diverse learners. - Teachers will receive Professional Development from our Instructional Cornerstones on the Multiple Intelligences. Teaching practices will reflect the Multiple Intelligences in order to address the different learning styles and needs in their classrooms. Professional Development will train teachers on the philosophy and implementation of Multiple Intelligences goal to enhance teacher practice and increase student learning.  In continuing our instructional work with Impact Teams, teachers expressed the need to increase their knowledge of the ELA standards and to collaborate to create an action plan on how to effectively impact student performance at all levels. - Core Collaborative Consultant will support teachers in analyzing trends in student work, discuss the progression, and design Impact Teams with a focus on ELA instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 14  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1) By June 2019, 100 % of teachers will REDESIGN Rigorous Math Instruction with a special emphasis on good conversational behavior and constructing viable arguments with well-developed routines and procedures using effective strategies such as, but not limited to, the ones provided by professional learning sessions to develop Accountable Talk for both the teacher and all learners including Students with Disabilities as measured by lesson plans as well as teacher anecdotal reports on individual student progress. Teachers will foster the learning needs of all students including those with disabilities through their Multiple Intelligences. All mathematics teachers will use C.U.B.E.S. to foster problem-solving skills. 2) By June 2019, 100% of participating mathematics teachers will engage in Algebra for All coursework and be provided with ongoing research-based professional learning to strengthen their capacity to improve their mathematics instruction and support student readiness for success in Mathematics in Grades 3 - 5 as measured by professional learning attendance logs, classroom inter-visitations and coaching feedback. 3) By June 2019, 100% of students in grades K-5 will be exposed to all Multiple Intelligence Learning Styles to increase the accessibility of learning experiences for all children, as measured by a Multiple Intelligence checklist. 4) By June 2019, 100 % of teachers of Grades 2- 5 will have participated and collaborated on Grade Level Impact Teams’ protocol to further develop their understanding and grade level expectations of a targeted ELA standard and create action plans for all learners at each performance level in order to increase student achievement as measured by pre and post assessment data, teacher feedback and student anecdotals. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will attend professional learning sessions during school hours provided by teacher leaders and consultants with a focus on good conversational behavior and constructing viable arguments with well-developed routines and procedures using effective strategies in the math classroom. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Pre K to 5 Once a month Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Teacher Leaders Math instructional leads Consultants Classroom Teachers Goal 2 Algebra for All All Teachers Monthly Administration Teachers will attend professional learning sessions provided by teacher leaders and NTN consultants with a focus on algebraic thinking in mathematics instruction and support student readiness for success in Mathematics in Grades 3 - 5. Other professional development includes: Intervistations of Algebra for All classrooms and debriefing sessions with teacher leaders and NTN consultants. Algebra for All professional development sessions Multiple Intelligences All Classroom and all Cluster Teachers will implement different teaching approaches to expose and engage students to a variety of MI tasks, encompassing a multitude of intellectual abilities. All Teachers will assess and support all ranges of 'intelligences'. Both teachers and students will inventory completed MI tasks and date specific activities that fulfill each learning style. Most teachers will attend Multiple Intelligence Professional Development sessions, offered during Monday's PD time. Teachers will assess student strengths and challenges as well as their developing interests and undesirable activities. 3 to 5 Sept 2018 – June 2019 Teacher Leaders Math instructional leads NTN Consultants Classroom Teachers All Teachers Pre K-5 Monthly Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration Teacher Leaders Instructional Cornerstones Classroom Teachers Students 2018-19 CEP 16  Goal 4 Impact Teams Educators will meet on Grade Level Impact Teams to discuss best practices to effectively teach a targeted ELA standard using the EAA (Evidence, Analysis, Action) protocol to create action plans for all diverse learners at each performance level in order to increase student achievement. Impact Teams will use The Empowered Learner by Paul Bloomberg as a resource. Teachers of Grades 2-5 Once a week planning time Administration Teacher Leaders ELA instructional leads Core Collaborative Consultant Classroom Teachers Once a month collaborations with the grade Once every other month with The Core Collaborative consultant, Rachel Syrjya 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will take the following steps in order to engage our parent/guardian population in the area of rigorous instruction and the Common Core State Standards: 1. Back to School Night: Classroom teachers will expose parents to the Common Core State Standards in all disciplines and will “translate” these standards into parent friendly language. Teachers will also prepare materials with tips outlining how parents may incorporate these CCSS into the everyday lives of their children at home. 2. During November 2018 and March 2019 two day conferences, afternoon conferences will consist of: 1. Student-Led Conferences - students will utilize their Student-Driven Portfolios to showcase their progress and next steps in learning. 2. Parent/Guardian Workshop - an optional parent workshop (30 minutes) will be held which focuses on unpacking the standards and providing resources for helping their children at home. 3. Parent Coordinator and ENL Teachers will host a parent workshop where the CCSS will be translated into the languages of the families present (survey sent home prior to indicate language choices.) 4. Monthly Interactive Teacher-Led Workshops that parents/guardians and students attend in which the classroom teachers will have prepared hands-on lessons to partake in with their children. Tangible resources will be prepared by classroom teachers for parents to take away with them for use with their children at home. Parents/guardians will also learn about the Multiple Intelligences through Student-Led Workshops. These workshops will be held every other month during Tuesday Parent Engagement time from the 2018-2019 school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers ,Teacher Leaders, Instructional Leads, Data Collected, Common Core Learning Standards, Instructional Meetings, Technology, Frameworks for Learning, Inter-visitations Professional Development Sessions are during school hours and take place within our school building. Teachers will attend professional learning sessions provided by teacher leaders and NTN consultants with a focus on algebraic thinking in mathematics instruction and support student readiness for success in Mathematics in Grades 3 - 5. Other professional development includes: Intervistations of Algebra for All classrooms and debriefing sessions with teacher leaders and NTN consultants. Algebra for All professional development sessions Monday afternoon Professional Development Sessions led by Instructional Cornerstones to expose the staff about the Multiple Intelligences. Teachers will also have time to prepare lessons and share best practices during this time. Educators will meet on Grade Level Impact Teams to discuss best practices to effectively teach a targeted ELA standard using the EAA (Evidence, Analysis, Action) protocol to create action plans for all diverse learners at each performance level in order to increase student achievement. Impact Teams will use The Empowered Learner by Paul Bloomberg as a resource. Teachers will also meet with the Core Collaborative Consultant to analyze student data in the area of Reading to identify student trends among each grade and develop teaching strategies that will drive student achievement. Tutoring for children is offered before the start of the school day to increase student performance using per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 18  Goal 1&2: By February 2019, 100% of participating teachers will have engaged in at least one Professional Learning Sessions on good conversational behavior and constructing viable arguments in math workshop and subsequently implemented strategies in their class measured by attendance logs and inter-visitation schedules, lesson plans and observation feedback. By June 2019, 100% of mathematics teachers will implement lessons that hold students accountable for justifying their thinking through qualitative conversations during the Math Workshop. By june 2019, 100% of students will take Pre-Assessments, Mid Assessments, and Post Assessments in math. Goal 3: By February 2019, all participating teachers in Grades 2-5, will have engaged in monthly grade level Impact Team meetings as measured by attendance logs, co-constructed action plans and assessment data. ta By June 2019, 100% of students will be assessed at least three times using Fountas and Pinnell. By June 2019, Exit Slips, Conference Notes, and other informal assessments will be conducted throughout the year to assess the progress of 100% of our student population. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) As measured by feedback via Danielson Framework, assessment data from standard based performance tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We are continuing to implement the Sanford Harmony Character Education program (Year 2), in order to continue to foster a positive school community where all students and staff feel a significant sense of belonging. According to our School Report Card results, an area of success is noted as "94% of teachers say that adults at their school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards". Based on the report card, "85% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities". We will use this to leverage a 10% increase in this area using the Sanford Harmony Character Education program. The Harmony program will RECLAIM trust across the school community by building morale and enhancing the spirit that once was. Units to be emphasized are diversity and inclusion, communication, peer relationships, empathy, critical thinking and problem solving for staff and students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the School Community will have engaged in our Character Education Harmony Program and contributed to the enhancement of the morale and or “RECLAIMING the Spirit” of the whole School Community by exploring and emphasizing diversity, inclusion, communication, peer relationships, empathy, critical thinking, and problem solving as measured by a 10% increase in staff and student feedback via surveys, picture and video collages of events, student self-reflections, attendance sheets at after-school events, and parent/guardian surveys. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All PS69 staff members will engage students in content through well-designed learning tasks and activities related through life skills Pre-K to Grade 5 Students All classrooms will show grade appropriate videos and have follow up discussions/activities to support life skills: Sept 2018-June 2019 1 time per week All Teachers Teacher Leaders Administration “Being Different is Beautiful” “All About Acceptance” The Character Education team will meet once a month to design personalized enrichment tasks for each grade to support the following: Pre K - Grade 5 students Sept 2018- June 2019 Managing and recognizing emotions Demonstrating care and concern Establishing positive decisions Making responsible decisions How to handle challenging situations constructively The Character Education team will enhance the students’ understanding of the “Harmony Program” through project-based learning: Continue with “Buddy Up” Discuss what makes a “Good” Buddy Assign Weekly Buddies Create a Buddy Board System Community check-in (Highs & Lows) solve problems Once a month Character Education Team Service Providers All Teachers Teacher Leaders Administration Character Education Team Service Providers All Teachers 2018-19 CEP 21  Pre K - Grade 5 students Teacher Leaders Administration Sept 2018 June 2019 - Once a month. Character Education Team Service Providers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will host the following activities in order to help our parent population grasp the understanding of supportive environments: 1. Character Education Team will host a workshop during parent engagement time where they will discuss the Harmony Program and the relevance of it for students. Key terminology will be explained to parent population in an attempt to supply them with a toolkit that may be utilized at home. The goal is to have the students utilizing the same terminology at home as they use in school. 2. Character Education Celebration Nights where students who display strong character traits are invited back to school at night for a celebratory pizza party. Parents and guardians are invited back to this event as well to participate with their children and to gain a further understanding of the Sanford Harmony Character Education Program. 3. Our Mental Health counselor, Mr. G. Deberry who has been assigned to our school will hold monthly workshops for parents/guardians with the goal of supplying them with strategies on how to better complex mental needs at home, which will in turn hopefully then result in better performance in school. 4. The Character Education Team will send home newsletters relating to the current Character Education goal. T-shirts will be created and sold to increase the awareness of strong Character Education qualities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Sandford Harmony Curriculum Guide, Character Education Goals, Grade Facilitators, Teacher Leaders 2018-19 CEP 22  The Inspiration Team includes teachers and paras, who meet monthly to design Team Building Activities for students and teachers that build morale for the school community. These monthly meetings take place on our Monday, Professional Development designated time. The TLP Team (Teacher Leadership for Equity and School Improvement) will meet during Monday, Professional Development designated time and on Wednesdays once a month for a per-session Learning Opportunity to meet and share culturally responsive pedagogical practices that promote equity in order to better serve all students and teacher. SAVVY SOCIALITES, an after school program offered to our students on the spectrum and social role models to increase and strengthen their social and emotional well being. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 5a-By February 2019, 100% teachers will share feedback of the Sanford Harmony program through an online survey to make adjustments of the curriculum for the remainder of the school year. Through the Sanford Harmony character education program, students will be exposed to quality character traits within each unit of study. These character traits include assertiveness, balance, being a good sport, embracing diversity, etc. Teachers will discuss and adjust best practices during common planning sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 5b The Character Education team will administer feedback sessions that monitor the success of second year program implementation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the success of the PS 69 Impact Teams Learning Walks, as well as the P.S. 69 Collaborative Teams Learning Showcase presentations in June of 2018, teachers reflected on their work and expressed an interest in continuing to collaborate on the team level. Additionally, all teachers effectively utilized the PS 69 Anchored-in-Inquiry discussion forum in order to share best practices and collaborate on the technological level. Teachers shared ideas and received feedback from teachers in other classrooms or on other grades, and displayed a desire to continue to utilize this tool for collaboration. As noted in our School Report Card, "83% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively". Also on our school wide google community, teachers reflected on their work with the elements of the Core Collaborative Initiative including Learning Intentions and Success Criteria, Student Self-Assessment, Portfolios and Goal Setting, Descriptive Feedback, and Formative Assessment. This community provided a platform for teachers school wide to reflect on their teaching strategies and to learn effective and impactful teaching strategies being utilized in other classrooms. In June, teachers expressed an interest in the continuation of this collaborative tool in order to enhance their knowledge of best pedagogical practices. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will REDESIGN our google community platform with a special focus on Impact Team Work, Core Collaborative Professional Learning, and Rigorous Math Instruction/ Algebra for All best practices and strategies. According to our School Survey, "66% of teachers say that they design instructional programs (for example, lessons and units) together." As an area of need, teachers will be provided with ample opportunities to participate in Professional Development within a supportive environment sustained by Collaborative Teachers and Effective School Leadership. To continuously and effectively improve our classrooms and school wide community. Teachers will participate in Impact teams through which they will then turnkey professional development to all staff members. A Master Teacher and Teacher Leaders will collaborate with teachers to enhance their pedagogy through individualized conferences, classrooms visits, and peer inter-visitations. An Instructional Lead team with peer coaches on each grade in ELA and Math will REBUILD Instructional Coherence and provide “Model Learning Arenas” to host inter-visitations and model lessons. Instructional Teacher Led Teams such as The Digital Age Learners Team, the Student Driven Portfolio Team, etc. will meet once monthly to collaboratively develop instructional strategies and school widen improvement efforts. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 24  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of grades 2-5 teachers will have contributed to the REBUILDING of the Collaborative Capacity of the School by expanding the Impact Team to grades 2 - 5. 100% of those teachers and teacher teams will collaboratively analyze and revise assignments and assessments to increase the cognitive complexity and alignment to standards and create opportunities that challenge students to perform at higher levels of learning, so that by June 2019, a minimum of 70% of students will show progress on the ELA and Math State assessment, thus exceeding the target on the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Impact Teams, Teacher-Led Teams, and Instructional Lead Team will meet bi-monthly in order to research best practices, collaborate with colleagues, and design and implement professional development as well as monitor progress of best practice implementation. activities related through life skills. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Pre-K -5 Monthly Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration Teacher Leaders Team Facilitators All Teachers  Weekly Professional Learning Communities All Teachers Monthly Administration Teachers use research based data to enhance quality goals to enhance student thinking and progress. Pre-K -5 Sept 2018- June 2019 Teacher Leaders Teachers reflect upon their teaching strategies, modify lessons, and share out best practices. School Teams are facilitated by Instructional Leaders, and teachers that also meet to discuss their groups’ outcomes. Team Facilitators All Teachers Collaborative planning time for teachers across grades of students with special populations (students with disabilities and ELL students) to modify curriculum to address specific needs & best practices, agendas & minutes of meetings are shared on our Google Community. All Teachers Monthly Teacher Leaders Pre-K -5 Sept 2018- June 2019 Team Facilitators All Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home in the following ways: 1. The classroom teachers will utilize Tuesday, Parent-Engagement time to make conferences calls and schedule meetings to share resources for parents to utilize at home that sign to student goals of their individual child. 2018-19 CEP 26  2. The school Portfolio Team will hold an informational meeting regarding the importance of a student portfolio and they will guide the parents through how they may go about asking certain questions to further student conversations about the reflection of their work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Frameworks for Learning Core Anchored-In-Inquiry Team Meetings  The Core Collaborative Professional Development Sessions  Impact Teams (Grades 2-5)  Impact Team Professional Development Sessions  Common Core Learning Standards  Technological Equipment: laptops, interactive whiteboards, computer lab  Tutoring is offered prior to the school day and after school to increase student performance offered via per-session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will have discussions on the Google Community regarding the implementation of Impact Teams in response to challenges and celebrations and Rigorous Math Instruction/ Algebra for All best practices and strategies. By June 2019, 100% of teachers participating in Teacher Teams will showcase challenges and successes incurred and how their team impacted student learning through analyzing student data such as but not limited to formative assessments, state test scores, surveys...etc. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 27   As measured by student assessment data and teacher surveys/feedback. By June 2019, a minimum of 70% of students will show progress on the ELA and Math State assessment, thus exceeding the target on the School Quality Guide. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers must be supported adequately in the area of social-emotional well being in order to best support our diverse learners. Due to the needs presented in our learning environment survey, trust across the school community must be reclaimed by building morale and “reclaiming” the spirit of our school community. This must be done through genuine collaborative and supportive efforts by teachers and administration alike such as goal setting teacher team collaboration, and inspirational team building activities provided by the school spirit team. To support our teachers pedagogical competencies while supporting their social-emotional well-being, all teachers participate in the best practice of Professional Goal Setting based on Advance Data. The instructional goals set by all teachers will be supported by Administrators and allow staff to grow and develop professionally and emotionally. Administration and teachers meet after all observations to discuss growth and next steps. These discussions are held as a means to improve pedagogical practices and student achievement. Inter-visitations and Re-structured Professional Development are utilized to support teachers and improve their practices and professional well-being. The PAWS Club and PURRS Club also recognize and addresses the social-emotional needs of staff and students. Ms. Murphy’s PAWS and PURRS clubs allows PS 69 students to assist her in fostering liters of puppies or kittens as an extension of former chancellor Carmen Farina’s initiative which focuses on “social and emotional competence, academic achievement, and awareness of the needs of shelter pets.” While this practice seeks to nurture responsibility and social-emotional well-being of our students, teachers are offered this social-emotional support as well. Teachers are permitted to attend the PAWS/PURRS Club rooms during their preparation and/or lunch periods in order to successfully rejuvenate their minds so that they may provide authentic compassion and sensitivity to our diverse learners seamlessly throughout the school day. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 29  By June 2019, 100% of teacher trust and collaboration will be enhanced through individual engagement in Professional Goal Setting, Inter-visitations, Peer Coaching, Advance Reflections and Feedback, Team Building Building Activities, PAWS & PURRS Club and so on as measured by End of Year Summative Conferences, the 2018-2019 Learning Environment Survey results, and Teacher Ratings.. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers and administrators will meet in the beginning of the school year to analyze prior year’s teacher rating to set attainable goals for the 2019-2020 school year. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Pre-K to Grade 5 Students Timeline Administration All Teachers Once a month Sept 2018– June 2019 The Core Collaborative Team alongside administration will conduct workshops based on teacher’s goals. All Teachers Pre-K-5 Timeline Administration Intervisitations are highly encouraged to embrace colleagues in mastering their goals. Team building-activity based workshops on a monthly basis. Once a month Teacher Leaders All Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home by taking part in the following: 1. PAWS & PURRS Club facilitators will host after school workshops for parents/guardians and students, as well as adoption events allowing students, parents/guardians to volunteer and become involved in the social-emotional well being efforts and activities of the school community. 2. Parents/Guardians will be invited to Open School Nights. During these events classroom teachers will expose parents to the Common Core State Standards in all disciplines and will “translate” these standards into parent friendly language. Teachers will also prepare materials with tips outlining how parents may incorporate these CCSS into the everyday lives of their children at home. ASD Coach will also present a workshop on Mindfulness for parents/guardians to help improve social-emotional well being of their children at home. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Staff of PS 69 2. Administration 3. ASD Coach 4. Cluster Teachers 5. Teacher Leaders 6. Parents/Guardians 7. Professional Development 8. Parent/Engagement Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of teachers professional growth will be monitored by the teacher evaluation tool in which they will improve least one level in at least two components (e.g. from developing to effective in component 3b - Questioning & Discussion Techniques via the Danielson framework) during informal and formal observations. In addition, student progress will demonstrate teacher’s progress toward delivery of instruction as measured by running records, progress reports, assessments, student-driven portfolios, and writing pieces. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. Teacher Observations via Danielson Framework (improvement from one level to the next in a given component - e.g. from developing to effective in component 3b - Questioning & Discussion Techniques) 2. Student-Driven Portfolios 3. Progress Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey indicates that 86% of parents feel the principal encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings. Our goal is to increase to 90% of families that feel the principal encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings. Additionally, the Learning Environment Survey also states that 97% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. Our goal is to increase this percentage from 97% to 100% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. In order to enhance our parent outreach,involvement, and feedback, family-community ties will be strengthened through continuation of the Sanford Harmony Program as well as increasing our family functions during the day, in the evening, and on the weekends by hosting Dessert Dates, Movie Nights, Sweetheart Dance, Child-Parent Kickball Game, Student-Led Conferences, Parent Workshops, Character Education Celebration and so on. Additionally, due to the overwhelming response from teachers, students and parents as measured by reflection sheets and discussion boards PS69 will continue to hold a Student-Led Conference in November 2018 and March 2019. This practice allows for a strong connection to be made among teachers, students, and family members, as students take ownership of their learning to communicate their own successes with parents and guardians. Furthermore, parent workshops are routinely offered to assist parents in supporting their child academically, socially, and emotionally. Classroom teachers, teacher leaders, and the ASD Coach deliver those workshops and educate parents on strategies to be implemented at home. Students have opportunity to attend functions during and after school in order to strengthen the home-school connection. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students will engage in at least one after-school family function to help strengthen family and community ties as measured by Attendance Logs of After-School Activities (Evening) involving families including but not limited to Student Led Conferences (November, March, May), Dessert Dates, Movie Nights, Sweetheart Dances, Child-Parent Kickball Games, and Character Education Celebrations. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Reaching out to Parents Ensures Student Success (ROPESS) Team will collaborate to brainstorm meaningful functions to increase family and community participation in school functions. The ASD Coach and Social Worker are a part of this team to ensure that activities for students with disabilities are offered. The parent coordinators are also a part of this team and they ensure activities to enhance parent involvement for our ELL population. All students and parents/guardians of the school community, including students with disabilities and ELLs ROPESS Team, Portfolio Team, Classroom teachers, Administration ASD Coach Social Worker Sept. 2018 to June 2019 -weekly meeting minutes -monthly calendar events Pre-K-5 Students including all students with disabilities and ELLs Teachers Students Sept 2018– June 2019 Parents/Guardians All staff members and students are actively engaged in planning and facilitating student led conference nights where parents/guardians visit the school to acknowledge this celebratory practice. Evidence of this will be collected by weekly ROPESS team minutes as well as monthly school calendars in order to reference events available to parents/guardians of all diverse learners. All students will have the opportunity to choose their Student-Led Conference presentation and Students with Disabilities and ELLs will have the opportunity to collaborate with their respective related service providers and/or ENL teachers to support them in this endeavor. Examples include: PowerPoint Song Speech Video 2018-19 CEP 34 The ROPESS team will reflect on events based on parent/guardian, student, and teacher feedback in order to make adjustments and add/remove family events. All students and parents/guardians of the school community Timeline Weekly from ROPESS Team, Portfolio Team, teacher volunteers, administration All staff members will be analyzing feedback from parents/guardians in regard to Student Led Conferences and Open school nights. This analysis will be done on a weekly basis during ROPESS team meetings. Sept 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parents/Guardians ROPESS TEAM Student driven portfolio team and professional development provided by this team Teacher volunteers Administration Instructional leads/teacher leaders/coaches Parent Coordinator Sanford Harmony Program & Professional Development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of students will have chosen at least one family function activity to participate in as measured by event attendance logs, and parent/guardian communication. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 35  As measured by student and parent/guardian attendance at after school family functions and Student-Led Conferences, and the improvement of learning environment survey results: Our goal is to increase to 90% of families that feel the principal encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings. Additionally, the Learning Environment Survey also states that 97% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. Our goal is to increase this percentage from 97% to 100% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) English Language Arts (ELA) All 3RD , 4TH and 5th Grade students were invited to attend Identification of students based on multiple measures, including analysis of student BenchmarkAssessments, FountasandPinnell Benchmark Assessments, Saturday/Stem Academy - Thepurpose of the program is to provide additional academic support in ELA, Math, Science, technology and engineering through the use of LEGO Robotics and Engineering is Elementary. Every 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade student will be invited to attend this hands on learning program. Students were placed into homogeneous groups and given differentiated tasks based on student driven goals. 2. RTI Model – Classroom will be building the RTI model into their daily ELA block. Teachers work with targeted students identified by the Grade Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group Instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) SATURDAYS October - June 8:30-11:30 # of students: 180 During the School Day # of Students: 30 2018-19 CEP 37  1:1 and Small group instructionwithin theclassroom Teacher Anecdotalsand Observations, Student WorkandGoalMastery analysisthroughStudentDriven Portfolios and Core RTI Teams. Teachers work with these students to scaffold instruction where remediation is needed. ● Strategies will include:  Good habits/Great Readers, Get Ready NY, Fundations  Concepts taught through the use of manipulatives and interactive white board resources to support content.  Use of visuals and kinesthetic approaches such as tapping out sounds  Modeling fluency and comprehension strategies  Repeated Reading with Fluency Strategies  Highlighting important information  Utilizing Graphic Organizers Mathematics All 3RD , 4TH and 5th Grade students were invited to attend 1. Saturday/Stem Academy - The purpose of the program is to provide additional academic support in ELA, Math, Science, technology and engineering through the use of Small Group Instruction SATURDAYS October - June 8:30 -11:30 # of Students: 180 2018-19 CEP 38  LEGO Robotics and Engineering is Elementary. Every 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade student will be invited to attend this hands on learning program. Identification of students based on multiple measures, including analysis of student Students will be placed into groups and given differentiated tasks based on student driven goals BenchmarkAssessments, Beginning of theYearGo MathAssessments, Teacher Anecdotalsand Observations, Student WorkandGoalMastery analysisthroughStudentDriven Portfolios 2. RTI Model – Classroom will be building the RTI model into their daily Math block. Teachers work with targeted students identified by the Grade and Core RTI Teams. Teachers work with these students to scaffold instruction where remediation is needed. ● Strategies will include:  Finish Line, Common Core Performance Coach Book, NY Progress Book  Teacher modeling and Think Aloud  Concepts taught through the use of manipulatives and interactive white board resources to support content. 1:1 and Small group instructionwithin theclassroom During the School Day # of Students: 24 2018-19 CEP 39  Science All 3rd, 4th, and 5th Grade students were invited to attend. Grade 4Students whoscored belowthemedian scalescores of a 2 or 3 on the 2017-2018Science State Exams. Identification of students based on analysisofmultiple measures, includingClassroom Assessments, Teacher Anecdotals, Student WorkandGoalMastery  Hands on/discovery based approach, Everyday Math Games  All lessons contain a minimum of 2 essential questions that students are held accountable for answering by the end of the Conference. Saturday/Stem Academy -The purpose of the program is to provide additional academic support in ELA, Math, Science, technology and engineering through the use of LEGO Robotics and Engineering is Elementary. Every 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade student will be invited to attend this hands on learning program. Students were placed into homogeneous groups. Groups were given differentiated tasks based on student driven goals.  NYS & City Scope and Sequence and CCLS Small groupinstruction Saturdays October - June 8:30 - 11:30 # Students: 180 2018-19 CEP 40  Small group and 1:1 instruction within the classroom During the School Day # Students: 5 analysisthroughStudentDriven Portfolios,Teacher Observations   FOSS Modules Lessons are aligned to the Ready Gen Reading program  Differentiated Lessons focusing on strengthening questions practices  Hands on/discovery based approach  Online programs, modified materials  Teacher modeling, re-teaching and Think Aloud  Social Studies is integrated into ELA utilizing the following supports:  NYS & City Scope and Sequence and CCLS aligned to the Ten Unifying Themes  Concepts taught through the use of manipulatives and interactive white board resources to support content.  Online programs, Social Studies Identification of students is based on analysisofmultiple measures, includingClassroom Assessments, Teacher Anecdotals, Student WorkandGoalMastery analysisthroughStudentDriven Portfolios,Teacher Observations 2018-19 CEP 41  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Identification of students based on school evaluations, IEPMandatedService, RTI Team At Risk Service, By Parent Request modified materials  Hands on/discovery based approach & City Scope and Sequence and CCLS aligned to the Ten Unifying Themes  Concepts taught through the use of manipulatives and interactive white board resources to support content  Online programs, modified materials Guidance Counselor- At Risk Counseling, Peer mediation; Conflict resolution; Fostering social emotional awareness, self-esteem, self-respect, caring classroom; Improving attention, focus, and behavior; career development; Crisis Intervention; Parental contact & Counseling; ACS referral & Outreach ● Strategies include: Play Therapy, Art Therapy, Biotherapy Social Skill Activities, Games, Social Stories, Social Scenarios, Small Group and Individual 1:1 During the School Day # of Students: 29 2018-19 CEP 42  Sensory Strategies to regulate emotions Recognizing/ Discussing feeling using visuals/ Manipulatives, Roll Playing, Understanding appropriate behaviors Social Worker - Meets with students for: Lack of focusing, depression, physical emergencies- as needed. Meets with parents with regards to children who have social issues which are impacting their academics. ● Strategies may include: Divorce feelings, Problem Solving Emotions, Organizing Thoughts, Focusing skills and attention, creating lists, and checklists Counseling Discussion/Activities, Play Therapy Feelings Box, Breathing techniques and Clearing of Mind Individual 1:1 During the School Day # of Students: 5 2018-19 CEP 43  2018-19 CEP 44  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Eight 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 45  Once a Temporary Housing student is registered, a school aide makes a "care packet" for the students. The   packet includes pencils, notebooks, pens, highlighter and crayons. If a student does not have a school bag present the school or PTA will supply one the day of. In terms of a student being identified as needing glasses (both at the school/home level) P.S. 69 has aligned with Lens Crafters in the Staten Island Mall. The company requires the school to submit a request for the glasses on School letterhead and signed by a school administrator. The Company provides a free examination as well as a pair of glasses for the student. For the 2017-2018 school year we will be having a STEM Program at P.S. 69. The program will incorporate academics (Science, Technology, Engineering and Math). Every student in Temporary Housing will receive an invitation to attend this free program.  AIS Intervention in both ELA and Math. The intervention utilizes small group instruction consisting of 4-6 students. The goal of the intervention focuses on the specific standards the students need to progress in. The school also provides counseling services for the students.  To monitor the academic progress of the students in Temporary Housing the school RTI/PPT Team will analyze the performance and progress of each student designated as Temporary Housing during the monthly meetings. The purpose will be to identify if the interventions are working (data-assessments, teacher records/small group and individual conference notes). If the Team feels not enough progress has been made the Team will alter the Intervention (frequency, duration). The parents and guardians will be informed of the changes, not only to keep them informed, but also give them the opportunity for their insight as well (collaboration). 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $8,417 2018-19 CEP 46  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 47  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 48  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 49  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 069 Daniel D. Tompkins, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 069 Daniel D. Tompkins will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 51  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 69 Daniel D. Tompkins, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 52  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 53  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 55  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 56  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 69 is located in the Heartland Village neighborhood of Staten Island, New York. We have approximately 970 students. Our ENL population fluctuates between 111-125 students. Entitled students in grades K -5 participate in one of 3 ENL instructional programs outlined in our LAP and Title III overviews. We are committed to providing a quality, standards-based education for our ELLs. Our expectations for their achievement is on par with our expectations for our monolingual students. According to our NYSESLAT data, our Transitioning and Expanding students in grades 2-3 achieved low scores in the reading and writing portions of the exam. We have found that this subgroup could benefit from additional support acquiring and utilizing strategies and skills that would help strengthen comprehension of expository and fiction texts, and the ability to accurately respond to prompts pertaining to such passages. In analyzing past ELA, Math and Science exams and scores, it has been determined that ELLs can benefit from small group instruction to help dissect, analyze and comprehend the questions and reading passages that are presented in State exams. As a result, we deem it necessary to invite Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding ELL students to our Saturday Academy. Our Title III LEP Programs are designed to provide our Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding students in grades 2-5 with reading strategies which will help them to better comprehend, generate questions, form predictions, comprehensively respond to and summarize the content that they are reading. Students participating in these programs will have the opportunity to borrow books and dictionaries in their home language from the ENL teacher's lending library. These resources will provide support in their home language, and can also prompt them to make connections which will help to increase their English language proficiency. We believe our supplemental programs will further strengthen the home-school connection, and as such our students, parents and teachers will benefit from participating in the programs outlined below. All aspects and components of each Title III program will be taught in English. S.O.S. - Signs of Success Grades 2-3- comprised of 20 students with proficiency levels of Transitioning and Expanding. The duration of the program will be January 12, 2019 through May 4, 2019 for fifteen weeks (30 sessions). The program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays 2:30-3:30 p.m. The program will be taught by one certified ENL teacher and one highly qualified ENL trained content area teacher who has shown effective implementation of the Common Core State Standards in ELA. The ENL and content area teacher will provide direct instruction through the team-teaching model. The ratio of instruction time will be broken down into a 15 minute mini-lesson, 30 minute group work period and a 15 minute share and reflection session. During this time, the ENL and content area teacher will rotate among groups of students to ensure that each student is engaged and on task. During these rotations, the teachers will informally assess progress and will record notes and anecdotals describing the students' strengths and areas needing continued support. The materials to be utilized for the S.O.S program are supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction throughout the school day. These materials will be Scholastic's Guided Reading cards and Toolkit Texts. Each of these resources will support our ELL learners because 2018-19 CEP 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information they offer vocabulary-rich, engaging, short fiction and non-fiction articles which are accompanied by visuals. The content of these articles will help develop the students' proficiency with making predictions, using prior knowledge, forming conclusions, asking and answering questions and formulating a comprehensive summary of what was just read. Additionally, some articles within Toolkit Texts are offered in Spanish which can be distributed to the students whose home language is Spanish. These articles can be used by the child and his/her family to discuss the content which was worked on during the S.O.S program. This practice will further strengthen the home-school connection. Throughout each session, students will be engaged in activities; such as picture walks, partner/group turn and talk, brainstorming questions, note-taking, share alouds and explaining any prior knowledge and/or connections. Teacher-created lessons based on surveying texts, asking questions, making predictions, closely reading and annotating texts, responding to texts in various ways, and summarizing texts using evidence and key details will span over 2-3 sessions and/or will be based on data of students' progress. Upon completion of each strategy, parents will be invited to the S.O.S program to participate in a learning session with their children. These parent-invited sessions will help foster the home-school connection by allowing students to share their learning with their family members. Furthermore, during these sessions, teachers will provide parents with strategies which can support their children at home. Student grouping will be flexible in order to maximize learning. At times, students will be homogeneously grouped based on the strategies/skills that need support, while other times students will be heterogeneously group in order to foster scaffolding among peers. iPads will be incorporated into lessons to offer additional support for language acquisition and comprehension of content. These devices will allow another means for scaffolding instruction. We chose to purchase iPads rather than use school computers so that the students can take these devices home to continue practicing and learning. This, of course, will be contingent upon written parental agreement and responsibility. All iPads will be locked in a secured cabinet in the ENL teacher's room. Her responsibilities include taking inventory of the iPads on a daily basis. Ratio of teacher to student will be 1:10, with the ENL and the content teacher rotating among groups to ensure that each child has had direct instruction. Student attendance will be manually recorded by the ENL teacher at each session. Attendance records will be maintained along with other pertinent documents pertaining to the S.O.S program, and will be filed in the ENL teacher's Title III binder. Any literature, progress reports, invitations or other items of memoranda pertaining to the S.O.S. program will be distributed to the students in their home language. Saturday Academy- Grades 2, 3, 4, 5 This program will run from January 12, 2019 through March 30, 2019 during the hours of 9 a.m.- 11:30 a.m. for a total of 11 Saturdays. It will be taught by two teachers with extensive knowledge of the demands or NYS ELA and Math exams, as well as experience with science content. One ENL teacher will provide further review and practice for ELLs with the academic rigors of the State assessments. One teacher will work with 20 ELLs in grades 2-3, while the other teacher will teach grades 4-5 with about 20 ELLs. We are scheduling 60 minutes for literacy, 60 minutes for math and 30 minutes for science. The ENL teacher will push in during the literacy block for each group, as well as the science session for the 4-5 grade group. Saturday Academy incorporates multiple reading, writing and analytical skills. 1- Focus on understanding the demands of the questions and directions on the NYS ELA and Math exams. 2- Increasing vocabulary fluency. 3- Writing relevant responses. 4- Increasing comprehension of science content. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information We will focus on skills which need to be retaught and/or reviewed based on the recommendation of both the classroom and ENL teacher. Interim assessments and in classroom observations drive this decision. Our instructional program is driven by individual students needs and supplements mandated services. Enrichment, remediation and transitional support will be given to identified students. Teacher input and assessment results will determine our students' focus. We have selected the above interventions because they meet the needs of our ELL population. This consistent, sustained and supplemental service will support our students in all subject areas. Our focused initiative will provide targeted, differentiated instruction for our ELLs who have acquired verbal and listening skills, but may be delayed in reading and writing. This approach will facilitate comprehension, not only of core reading, writing and math skills, but will also aid in acquiring science and social studies concepts. All components and activities of this Saturday Academy will be taught in English. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In an effort to create a professional learning community, our on-going PD offered by our ENL teacher gives Title III teachers, as well as other educators, the opportunity to not only enhance prior knowledge but to also initiate topics for future workshops. Our PD is researched based and relevant to student/teacher needs. ELL issues, techniques, strategies and data are discussed in an effort to include ELLs in all aspects of classroom practices. Our entire staff and support personnel will participate in on-going professional development dealing with ENL/ELL issues. Professional Development for Title III teachers will be offered by the ENL teacher to the content and classroom teachers who will be working any Title III programs. The mission of such professional development is to give teachers the opportunity to enhance their prior knowledge of the needs of ELL learners, and to provide tools and techniques which can be utilized when scaffolding an ELL student. Professional Development sessions will be centered on how to utilize the resources chosen for the Title III programs, as described above, as well as ways in which teachers can support their ELL students in the Four Modalities of Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking. Each teacher participating in Title III professional development will receive a copy of "Making Content Comprehensible for English Language Learners, 5th Edition" and also, "How to Reach and Teach English Language Learners". These references will be used to facilitate discussion on effective methods for working with ELL students in the Title III programs, as well as with ELLs in their class. Title III professional development sessions will be conducted one Monday per month from the months of December-May (program duration) during our allotted professional development window of 2:35-3:40. Attendance will be taken at each session. Each participant will be provided with an agenda of topics to be discussed. Any notes and minutes will be recorded and filed along with the session's attendance sheet in the ENL teacher's Title III professional development binder. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part C: Professional Development ENL teachers who are providing Title III professional development will also receive mandated professional development implemented by DELLs and the Borough Field Office Support Center. Title III Professional Development topics include but are not limited to: November: Introduction to Teaching ELL's and SIOP Model and Multiple Intelligence December: Introduction to Title III programs Who are your ELLs and how are their English language proficiency levels categorized? January: Introduce the SQP2RS (Survey, Question, Predict, Read, Respond, Summarize) framework Explain each component and how the program will be designed to positively impact the progress of our ELL students. Allow time for teachers to brainstorm activities that will be used for each component of the framework, and explain how each activity will help an ELL learner better understand the importance of such strategy. February: This month's professional development will focus on ways in which we can include parents in upcoming hands-on sessions Teachers of the Title III programs are encouraged to share and reflect upon practices that were successful in order to have universal best practices in place for our Title III programs. March: Differentiating Ideas for Multi-level groups This month's professional development offers teachers ways in which they can meet the needs of students with different abilities and proficiency levels. April: Using assessment to drive further instruction Teachers will analyze student work, discuss trends and use findings to develop lessons that will provide ELL students with any additional support needed to help ensure they are reaching academic goals. Introduction to the NYSESLAT and what it entails. May: Implications for additional support for ELLs in the classroom Reflection of Title III program with emphasis on strategies and resources that were effective. These Professional Development sessions will positively impact the progress of ELL students by providing teachers more knowledge and tools with which to use to meet the needs of their ELLs. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 2018-19 CEP 61  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Based on feedback from parents of ELLs, they feel they would benefit most from workshops that detail ways in which they can support their child's learning, thus we have outlined several opportunities for parents of ELLs to attend workshops. Parents of Title III students will be invited once per month to partake in the learning activities of their child in the after-school Title III programs. During these sessions they will have the opportunity to acquire skills and strategies that can be implemented in the home. There will be a total of six parent workshops, one at the start of the program and five for the duration of the program. Each session will last approximately one hour. Parents will be notified of these activities via distribution of letters, in their home language, which will be sent home with their child. Additionally, dates of such meetings and workshops will be displayed on the school's website calendar and reminders will be electronically sent through the school's Remind text/email feature. Parent attendance will be recorded at each session. Attendance sheets will be filed in the ENL teacher's Title III binder. Parents of students participating in Title III programs will be invited to a start-up meeting. At this meeting, the parents will be provided with information about the programs, the duration of the programs, as well as why their children were invited to these programs (based on proficiency level). This initial meeting will be held prior to the start of the Title III program. An agenda will be provided detailing topics of discussion. Time will be allotted for a question and answer period. Attendance will be taken and sign-in sheet will be filed in the ENL teacher's Title III binder. In addition to the hands-on sessions that parents of Title III students will be attending, various other workshops for parents of ELLs will be offered throughout the school year. These workshops will be centered around ways in which families can work together to strengthen the home-school connection. At these information sessions, parents will learn ways in which to encourage higher order thinking through the use of depth of knowledge questions. This practice, in turn, will enable them to continue to use relevant questions at home, conduct meaningful read alouds and generally participate in molding their children to be creative and analytical thinkers. Tentative schedule for ELL parent workshops: October: Techniques of Effective Questions November: Expanding Writing Responses December: Writing through Mathematics January: Unlocking Word Problems March: Helping your child with NYSESLAT May: Multicultural Night Each information session should run approximately one hour, and will include a question and answer session. Agendas and other pertinent handouts will be made available to the participants. Attendance will be recorded and stored with other ELL activities/events in the ENL teacher's files. Parents will be advised of these information sessions by receiving letters in their home language which will be sent home with their children. Additionally, these sessions will be posted to the school's website calendar. Translators will be provided at each session for which parents are in attendance. 2018-19 CEP 62  Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $8,418.00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $1403.00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. $2,806.00 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional Salaries Signs of Success 2 teachers x 1 hour x 28 sessions x $61.00= $3,416.00 Teacher Collaboration Planning Time: 2 Teachers x 3.5 hours x 1 session x $61.00=$427 Saturday Academy 3 teachers x 2.5 hours x 10 sessions x $61.00= $4,575.00 Teachers will attend professional development, school will host in house workshops from companies such as Achieve3000 and The Core Collaborative. Supplemental Materials 2 iPads @ $350.00 each for SOS Program = $700.00 Scholastic Guided Reading Short Reads (fiction) levels J-Q @ $895.00 per set Scholastic Guided Reading Short Reads (non-fiction) levels J-Q @ $645.00 per set Professional Development Materials 6 copies of Making Content Comprehensible for English Language Learners, 5th Edition @ $59.91 per copy = $359.46 6 copies of How to Reach and Teach English Language Learners at $32.00 per copy= $192.00 Paper and Pencils: $14.54 2018-19 CEP 63 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Expenses for field trips and transportation with ELL parents and students: Museum of Natural History, Planetarium, Liberty Science Center Planned Multicultural Night Music, Entertainment, Food, Teacher per-session to host event, $14,030.00 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other N/A N/A $1,403.00 TOTAL $14,030.00 2018-19 CEP 64  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name The Daniel D. Tompkins School Borough Staten Island School Number 069 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Doreen E. Murphy Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher R. CainN. AmitranoE. McCormick Teacher/Subject Area Corrine Caserta Teacher/Subject Area Laurie Mangialomini Related-Service Provider Denise De Nicola Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Salvatore Manuele Coach N/A School Counselor Adrienne Tiboni Parent Meital Elfassy Parent Coordinator Michelle Yzaguirre Field Support Center Staff Member Enrico Dominguez Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 935 2018-19 CEP 65 Total number of ELLs 114 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.19%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 0 3 0 2 0 4 0 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our staff uses data to inform decision making and drive instruction. Ongoing assessment allows us to not only evaluate student learning and growth but to also effectively target instruction. The DRA assessment provided the following data about oue ELLs: Grade DRA Levels K Pre A/A- D 1 D/E- I 2 I- M 3 M- P 4 P- S 5 S- V These results indicate that reading levels vary from "at risk" to "on standard". The instructional; programs we implement are 2018-19 CEP 66  geared toward meeting the literacy needs of our ELLs. 1. Our school uses the DRA assessment to: 1) determine reading level (independent instructional or frustration) 2) notice reading behaviors 3) determine guided reading groups 4) decide on instruction for skills block lessons. Teachers also use common core alligned pre-assessments to determine a student's comprehension baseline in order to differentiate instruction and put students in collaborative groups that will enable them to meet their needs/goals. A mid unit assessment reveals whether students are aquiring or struggling with the necessary concepts or skills. Small group guided instruction and differentiated task are driven by this data. A final independent task is given to further assess the progress of student learning. Using these results leads to differentiated instruction, remediation and enrichment. Our ELLs benefit from this assessment in that they are placed in appropriate groups for instruction. Small group, differentiated instruction allows the teacher to not only monitor reading comprehension strategies that our ELLs have acquired but to also notice areas where repetition and reinforcement are necessary. Classroom teachers collaborate with the ENL teachers to discuss and implement specific ENL strategies which will benefit the students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Differentiated, small group instructional practices are driven by the data from DRA, baseline and other formative assessments. Exit slips are also used to assess whether the student understands the concepts and skills taught if more help is required. The ENL students utilize self-assessment practices, such as aligning their internal understanding of the content to a specific color, 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Students are given a beginning of the year baseline assessment in English Language Arts and Mathematics. The results from these assessments help teachers develop lessons that will drive instruction for meeting the needs of all learners at every proficiency level. We evaluate the success of our ENL instruction by analyzing the extent of progress in all four modalities. ENL teachers use data from baseline assessments to develop lessons that are vocabulary rich, and provide support that is essential for comprehension of content in all academic areas. Additionally, ENL teachers work with ENL students in small group settings to enhance writing skills. Through the best practices of teacher modeling, peer scaffolding and teacher feedback, ENLs will be able to demonstrate the ability to apply the conventions of standard English into their genre-specific writing pieces and their daily assignments. Our most recent NYSESLAT scores, Spring 2017, reveal that all students have moved at least one proficiency level. We continue to analyze data to determine if AYP goals have been met or if programs need to be re-evaluated and modified. Classroom assessments, state tests, and teacher observations, all provide a lens as to how our ENLs are performing. Along with the "hard data" we look for emotional and social indicators including level of adjustment, friendships formed, comfort with participation, etc. We believe that academic, emotional, and social development are intertwined and as such we view each child holistically. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data has been gathered and analyzed then the ENL teacher along with the classroom teacher decide which strategies to use in order to best help each student. If the student is still not making progress then the he/she will be brought up at grade-wide RTI meetings. At this meeting the ENL and classroom teachers will discuss the difficulty the child is having and what strategies have been put in place. A team participant records all information given on this child. These notes are kept in a binder that is held onto by the RTI supervisor and brought to every meeting for K-5 children. Suggestions from the RTI coordinator, administration, as well as grade wide colleagues is given and a new strategy is decided upon. In eight weeks if the student is not making progress according to data kept by the teacher then the child is brought up to the Core RTI team. This team is made up of administration, RTI/Special Education Coordinator, ENL Teachers, Speech Providers, OT Providers, Physical Therapy Providers, Reading and Math Intervention teachers, and the School Counselor and Psychologist. The Core Team will develop an action plan for the student and utilize progress monitoring. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our vision for academic success coincides with the guidelines of the RTI frameworks. Once ELL data is analyzed and it is determined that an ELL Is not progressing at an appropriate rate, intervention occurs immediately. Classroom teachers work in 2018-19 CEP 67  small groups to deliver differentiated instruction utilizing various strategies and materials to best address the child's learning style. Progress monitoring occurs through observation as well as formal assessments. If the subsequent data reveals that an ELL requires more intense instuction, then the child receives small group instruction with a math or reading intervention teacher. This type of layered intervention and frequent monitoring aligns with the RTI frameworks. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the prior year's results of the NYSESLAT and State ELA and Mathematics exams to gauge our ELLs strengths and areas in need of improvement in all four modalities. We ensure that students are receiving balanced instruction in all literacy and mathematics areas. In order to address areas needing improvement, be it; reading, writing, listening and speaking, we provide enough scaffolding so that the student is able to engage in the lesson, at his own comfort level, with opportunity to achieve academic success. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL teachers have ATS access which allows them to retrieve all biographical and academic information pertaining to their ENL students. At the start of the school year, ENL teachers run data reports detailing their ENLs most recent NYSESLAT results. We then utilize this data, coupled with the NYSITELL score of any newly arrived ENL student, to determine how best to scaffold him/her in order to strengthen their reading, writing, listening and speaking skills. Based upon the students' score for each modality, we provide focus lessons and/or strategies that will promote multiple entry points for which the students can partake in their learning. After accessing student NYSESLAT scores from ATS, school leadership ensures that ENLs mandated minutes for ENL have been programmed into STARS. Administration makes certain that the ENL teachers' programs are designed to allow for integration into ENLs classrooms during content area instruction to allow ENLs to remain in the least restrictive environment. The appropriate number of teaching periods are alloted to ENL teachers to ensure that they are providing teacher-led small-group Stand Alone ENL instruction to their Entering and Emerging ENLs. During Common Planning periods and grade-wide Professional Development sessions, classroom and ENL teachers work collaboratively with school leadership to analyze the results of NYSESLAT, NYSITELL and NY State Exams in order to evaluate which strategies and techniques have been successful in our ENLs English language application and usage. Based upon these findings, we determine which instructional practices should remain in place and which may need to be restructured or modified. By using evidence-based instruction, we can scaffold students who are struggling or not making consistent progress in academic areas through the use of supplemental programs, such as Achieve 3000. This program offers lessons that are tailored to the students' individual proficiency level. Using the data from this program, paired with our formative and summative assessments, ENL teachers are better able to respond to ELLs' targeted areas of need by designing lessons that will enhance student performance and academic and social growth. Student output is continuously assessed, and strategies are evaluated to ensure that there are no gaps in instruction. Through our close analysis of student work, we will be able to identify patterns of misconceptions that impede upon the students' understanding of the task. These findings will enable the school community to construct lessons that target areas of need to assist the students in becoming more efficient learners. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 CEP 68  Our ENL program fosters English Language acquisition by reviewing and analyzing our data to provide the most beneficial comprehensive instruction. After determining each student's proficiency level we provide the mandated minutes; 360 minutes to our Entering and Emerging students, 180 minutes to our Transitioning and Expanding students, and 90 minutes to our commanding students. The integrated ENL minutes are dependent on both the student's proficiency level and upon the students' needs. Our groups are flexible and fluid. They vary depending on our informed decision about what will work best. Our groups may be heterogenious by grade and/or homogenious by proficiency level. Our Stand-Alone program provides Entering and Emerging ELLs with skills they require in order to acquire English Language proficiency. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our school closely monitors the mandated requirements for ELLs. Our three full-time ENL teachers create their schedule to assure compliance. Explicit instruction is provided in two ways: 1) Our stand-alone program allows for ENL strategies, language acquisition and support in content areas. Alluding all of our ENL teachers have certification in ENL and Common Branches. 2) Our integrated ENL instruction allows for ELA and content area material to be presented using ENL techniques and strategies. The use of visuals, manipulatives, graphic organizers, buddies, and technology coupled with ongoing assessments lead to explicit consistent instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is delivered in English by either the classroom teacher or content specialist. All of our teachers are trained in meeting the needs of ELLs. By using ENL strategies, such as modeling, scaffolding and peer collaboration, content becomes comprehensible. Our content specialists and coaches often attend workshops offered by the Office of English Language Learners, which they then turnkey to ensure that each staff member is proficient in ENL strategies and techniques which are expected to be used to meet the needs of each ELL student. Also, our ENL teachers collaborate with both the content area and classroom teachers to determine comprehension gaps. The ENL teachers can then address these issues during the stand-alone or integrated sessions with their students. Some techniques that are utilized are; using visuals, rephrasing and same language tutors, where applicable. We now also have specifically trained teachers pushing into content area classes. They focus on ELLs and SWD to make sure content is comprehensible. Their ownership of these students not only encourages the development of academic language, but also fosters the students' abilities to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Current ELL research supports our use of video, hands on activity, extensive student discourse, building on prior knowledge, and using personal experiences to help foster connections. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking ELLs are formally evaluated in their native language when the Spanish LAB is administered. In other instances, we rely on report card grades from other schools (or countries), prior assessment results, and parental input. We administer the NYS math assessments in a multitude of available languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 69  A) Plan for SIFE – Our plan for any future SIFE admits includes assessment of their needs, providing state mandated ELL periods, grouping based on language level, relevant materials and any other interventions deemed necessary. Academic Intervention Services, After School Programs, providing a language buddy, reaching out to parents in their native language are all considered and implemented, as needed. B) Plan for Newcomers – Newcomers are fully integrated into our school community. Newcomers are often given same language “buddies” to address immediate concerns. Books on tape and computer activities (such as Edmarks Mighty Math series and Imagination Express series), enrich their transition. These students also benefit from participating in various Title III programs (homework help, test prep, push- in teacher). These programs, along with differentiated, small group instruction during literacy and math blocks prepare ELLs for our academically rigorous curriculum and state tests. C) Plan for Developing ELL's- Developing ELL's have not acquired the academic language, reading skills and writing ability necessary to succeed on State exams. In order to address these deficits, ELLs are encouraged to participate in after-school activities, tutorials and study groups where through the use of high interest materials (Modern Curriculum Press Quick Reads and Reading for Comprehension) they are immersed in literacy practice, while acquiring English Language skills. Our Title III Programs offer additional support. Monitoring the progress of ELLs by the Inquiry Team keeps our staff aware of and involved in creating meaningful, standards based lessons for our ELLs. Item analysis of the ELA provides insight as to the specific reading comprehension skills which must be practiced. RTI strategies are implemented. D) Plan for Long term ELLs- We are a K -5 school and have not had students who have completed 6 years of ENL. However, in the event that this occurs, their literacy, lingusitic and social needs would be met. Teacher input, item skills analysis of questions on assessments and parent interviews would guide us further to create targeted interventions. The student would be monitored closely to determine whether he is learning and progressing. We are flexible and open to changing strategies to assure success. E) Plan for former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status – Our ENL teachers provide 90 minutes of ELA push in service for former ELLs up to two years after exiting ENL. Our ENL teacher and classroom teachers are well aware of the challenges these ELLs encounter. Staff development discusses this issue and offers strategies for cooperative/buddy grouping, rephrasing, vocabulary development and collaboration with assignments, in other words the student has attained total inclusion in the general education classroom. Our reading and math intervention teachers also provide support to our Commanding ELLs receive the state mandated test accomodations for 2 years after attaining proficiency on the NYSESLAT. These modifications, including extended time, if needed, are also in place for formal classroom assessments and test. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We have extensive classroom libraries, with an emphasis on non- fiction. Science and social studies are the major topics of these books and as such help prepare the ELLs for content area study. Our teachers use sheltered instructional practices. Research shows that these techniques not only increase comprehension but also acclerate language acquistion. We are implementing the languge and tasks outlined by the CCSS. We use the Go Math and Ready Gen series which have strong ELL components. Interactions with smartboards has been effective. Our ENL teachers supplement instruction with Rigby's English in my Pocket, On our way to English and Scott Foresman Accelerating English Language Learning. The strong visuals, colorful charts, musical chants, and high interest, relevant content engage our ELLs. The mentioned strategies are geared to motivate and educate all types of multiple learning styles. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Identification of ELLs with special needs is immediate. Our CSE team, along with the IEP teacher and speech teacher, notify the ENL teacher of new admits in alternate placements. The ENL teacher then examines the IEP and home language form. Language needs are determined and necessary interventions are put in place. AIS teachers, using the Wilson technique, along with other remedial strategies are used. Our special education ELLs are mainstreamed with our general education ELLs during ENL. We constantly evaluate our academic process and progress. We are flexible in reviewing, revising, eliminating and implementing strategies. Our teachers collaborate to determine what "works" and will lead to success in a rigorous academic environment. Our Special Ed ELLs are in ICT classes which provide ample opportunity for interaction with general ed students. They reap the benefits of peer tutoring and good language and behavior models. All our ELLs participate fully, in all classroom and school activities. They are considered assets to our school progress and performance. Speech teachers often 2018-19 CEP 70  collaborate with the ENL teachers to discuss best practices to promote language development. ELL-SWD are mainstreamed for ENL classes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our ELLs are fully integrated into every aspect of our curriculum. They set comprehensible, achievable goals in each area and are thus forced to think about their learning (metacognition).Content area instruction is scaffolded by modeling, bridging, building on prior knowledge and schema building. Content area teachers attend ENL Professional Development. With the use of the workshop model, all of our ELLs are fully involved in small group, differentiated instruction in reading, writing, science, social studies and math. Guided reading, hands on math games, and writing conferences give our ELLs ample opportunity for practice, comprehension and participation. The use of language buddies, bilingual libraries, and “ELL friendly” materials such as Go Math, computer software and books on tape enhance academic language. Our ELLs traditionally score above grade level on math assessments. All classes are taught in English. Our ELL students are also encompassed in the RTI model. If it is noted the student needs additional interventions in the classroom or outside the classroom setting (small group) or 1:1 they are provided as a recommendation by the RTI Grade Team or if needed the Core Team. The ENL teacher/classroom teacher and intervention teacher all devise a plan of action and discuss next steps strategies to implement, ensuring clarity and consistency. Academic deficiencies are addressed not only in the classroom but also during ELL integrated and stand alone periods. Our literacy and math intervention specialists work with both ELLs and former ELLs to remediate weakness as well as to offer enrichment opportunities. Our targeted interventions for ELLs in ELA, math and content areas include small group, differentiated instruction, and reteaching in different modalities to assure that we reach our verbal, auditory and tactile-kinesthetic learners. Our workshop model provides ample opportunity for instruction, guidance, practice and review. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? According to the 2017 NYSESLAT test scores, our data indicates that our ELL students in grades K-1 require more explicit instruction of strategy lessons that focus on speaking and language usage within the writing process. Activities will be structured to support student-to-student and small group interaction where ELLs use English to converse and communicate with peers. 2017's NYSESLAT scores indicate that our ELLs in grades 2-5 need more instruction on how to write constructed responses. In an effort to help students develop the ability to state their thoughts clearly and accurately in writing, we will provide our ELLs with small group guided reading and writing instruction. Through daily instruction, these students will engage in writing activities that will focus on developing a certain skill, examples being; using precise academic vocabulary, citing text evidence, stating and supporting an opinion, and how to attend to all components of an essay. This small group instruction will also teach and reinforce the importance of the peer/self editing process. In an effort to create the most positive, effective learning environment our administrators and staff continuously review existing programs. The upcoming school year will bring increased ELL related PD to assure that our students are fully engaged in every aspect of the learning process; the challenges of the CCSS also pertain to our ELL's. Another initiative involves the push in content specialist providing visuals, graphic organizers and helping with content specific vocabulary. We are also considering ways to build upon the native language skills of our students by creating after school language clubs lead by our multilingual Paraprofessionals. We are incorporating a character building program (Sanford Harmony) throughout the school. This is advantageous for our ELLs as they learn the meanings of abstract intangible concepts such as tolerance, honesty, gratitude, respect, and loyalty. They will have many meaningful exposures to these concepts as they internalize their meanings. We strive to create proven, researched based programs. Additionally, Sanford Harmony's program has many components where students are expected to verbally share their thoughts, opinions or prior experiences with a partner. Activities such as this foster a level of trust among peers, while strengthening an ELLs listening and speaking skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Our School wide Enrichment Model provides ample opportunities for our ELLs to participate in enjoyable, non-threatening and educational activities. Special assemblies, Brown Bag Lunches, and MIM (specialized interest periods), provide ELLs with opportunities to partake in interest-based activities. ELLs actively 2018-19 CEP 71  participate, develop and showcase their talents, and bolster their confidence by involvement in this initiative. ELLs not only have equal access to all of our daily programs, but also participate in after school activities. Parents are notified (translations available) regarding the many opportunities in which their children can participate. Programs include, but are not limited to; homework help, Anchors Away, Stem program, enrichment clusters, evening events and all other supplemental activities. Attendance records for all of these programs are kept on file with each individual facilitator, and are provided to School Administration. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school uses the Ready Gen reading curriculum, which is fully aligned by the Common Core Learning Standards. This program contains an ENL and an RTI component that utilizes strategies to help our ELL students better comprehend the content. Other materials such as visuals, also support student understanding. Differentiation of instruction along with scaffolding of instruction leads to independence at each proficiency level. As a learning community, we embrace discovery based learning techniques for our students. All of the disciplines are taught through the workshop model where the teacher will present new material to the whole group, the students will be involved in all aspects of the work period, which includes a group task, and independent work time. The teacher will differentiate instruction to meet the needs of each individual student. ELLs are fully integrated and involved in the workshop model. Students are encouraged to draw on their life experiences during reading and writing workshop. Through exposure to the writings of culturally relevant authors, the students develop a sense of what should be included in their own writing pieces. With the guidance of the teacher during conferencing, each of the students is expected to nurture their writing seeds throughout the stages of the writing process. Each student is reading books that are on the appropriate reading level. It is during workshop where the students will have an opportunity to learn analytical reading strategies and skills while being exposed to different literary genres and their respective elements. The teachers will often aide the class in dissecting the work of an author. By scaffolding instruction, ELLs begin to move from pictures to graphic organizers to lists and finally full written or oral responses. Our Go Math curriculum affords students the opportunities to work with many different kinds of math manipulatives. Lessons are developed to gradually release responsibility in order to mold students into becoming independent problem solvers. Our ENL teachers use Short Reads, Rigby On Our Way to English, and Scott Foresman Accelerated English series. Leveled, non-fiction libraries prepare the students for content area instruction. Technology, aligned with classroom lessons, is utilized (Achieve 3000, Star Fall, and Tumblebooks). These and other research based materials promote language development in all modalities. Smartboards and IPads are proven to be effective instructional tools. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our school offers the ENL model. The native language of our students is celebrated and forms the basis for exploration of their culture, traditions, values and ancestry. Multicultural literature enhances our classroom libraries. Our school library has many translated versions of books. Multicultural fairs are held during the school year to showcase our diversity and afford our students the opportunity to take pride in their heritage. We are continuing to build our bilingual non-fiction libraries so that social studies and science become more easily comprehensible. We also incorporate Achieve 3000 in school and at home component to continually expose the ENL students to text (vocabulary, inspired fluency and comprehension. Parents are also encouraged to utilize these sources to educate and inform their children. Native language is also used to inform parents of important social services such as Free Lunch/Breakfast etc., same language buddies, use of bilingual glossaries and bilingual content related books support the use of native language to transition to second language. Parents are invited to read in their native language to same language students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We are diligent in providing support and resources which correspond to the ELL's ages and proficiency levels. With the guidance of formal and informal assessments we are well aware of our ELL's varied proficiency levels. Our literature rich classroom libraries are leveled, MIM sessions (specialized interest groups) are age appropriate and lessons are differentiated. Monthly collaborative meetings between ELL teachers and collaborative classroom teachers are opportunities for teachers to discuss data findings and progress in all academic areas and share strategies. Additionally, participants of these meetings discuss any need for intervention for any ELL who is not showing progress in reading or mathematics. Speech teachers collaborate with ENL teachers to determine both the needs of students as well as the best methods to address these needs. 2018-19 CEP 72  ELL teachers apply for any grants that are offered which will provide funding for extra materials and/or programs which can enhance student learning. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs (and their families) are greeted personally by the ENL teachers and appropriate translators. They are welcomed to our community, assured of our commitment to educate their child, informed of school policies and requirements and encouraged to discuss any issues and concerns. They are made aware of our “open door” policy at P.S. 69 and our dedication to creating a warm, safe and welcoming social and educational environment. We enlist the help of our Paraprofessional Translator Team members for further assistance and to increase the comfort level of being in a new, unfamiliar environment. Prior to the beginning of the school year, we hold a Kindergarten orientation. Parents of ELLs continuously have access to translators, ELL teachers, parent coordinator and administration via phone calls, emails or face-to-face meetings. We ensure that all of their concerns are addressed. In addition, all students receive a “Welcome Back to School” letter itemizing procedure, necessary supplies, and school schedules. Translated versions in each ELLs home language are sent home as needed. In September our ELL teachers hold an orientation for ELL parents. They also meet the parents of all new admits, as they enroll, to explain the format and mandates of our school's ELL program. At this meeting, the ELL teachers ensure that any concerns the family may have are addressed. Our school's guidance counselors work in conjunction with our Parent Coordinator to provide information sessions for parents whose children will be entering middle school the following September. These meetings explain the Middle School application process and touch upon the expectations of middle school students. Translators are present at these meetings and literature is provided in students' home language. Our guidance counselor is available to provide emotional support to any student who may be fearful of attending a new school. She is able to provide students with coping skills and methods for communicating with new teachers and administrators. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? English is our language of instruction. We do, however, encourage and invite parents who speak and read in languages other than English to come to school and read to our students in their native language. Our multi lingual paraprofessionals also participate in native language read alouds and offer native language support. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our entire staff including principal, assistant principals, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, occupational, physical and speech therapists, secretaries and parent coordinator participate in on-going staff development sessions. ELL specific issues 2018-19 CEP 73  are addressed in workshops conducted by coaches, support specialists and ENL teachers. These sessions are held on staff development days and after school. ENL specific topics are also discussed during faculty conferences. Our onsite teacher center offers ELL related materials and research. September – Identification of ELLs October – Multicultural issues and the ELL student November – States of language acquisition December – ENL techniques and methods January – Ideas for classroom teachers Other workshops, not yet completed will follow for the months February – June. Our ENL teachers as well as classroom teachers attend ELL related professional development. They then turnkey the information for our staff. Classroom teachers often observe ENL methodologies in the ENL classroom. Our staff development often includes an ENL component where our ENL teachers supports the workshops presented by our literacy and math coaches. This support includes discussions about scaffolding of instruction, use of collaborative activities and experiments/manipulatives. We have also implemented “Lunch and Learn” and “Study Groups” with our ENL teacher. Our staff is trained in utilizing effective ENL strategies into daily activities, group lessons, content area instruction and assessments. Cultural implications, laws governing ENL and other issues are also discussed. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school meets the professional development requirements by providing all teachers with ELL specific professional development after school during alloted PD time, during lunch and learns and mandated professional development days. On these days agendas are provided as well as a sign in sheet. Both the agendas and sign in sheets are kept in a professional development binder that is kept by the ENL teachers. Our ENL teachers meet the 50% requirement by attending sessions held by OELL, watching ELL related webinars, attending meetings held by our district ELL liason, Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs during parent engagement time. The ENL teachers conduct face-to-face conferences during this time. In the event that a parent is unable to attend in person, a phone conference will take place. During these meetings the ELL teacher arranges to have translators present or will use the translator unit. At these meetings the ENL teacher discusses the goals of the program, the child's progress, and language development needs. Translation is provided by qualified pedogues or the DOE LTI Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our aim is to establish mutual trust and respect between ELL parents and our staff. The parents of ELL students are encouraged to not only become familiar with our school procedures but to also become active participants in school events. We hold informative orientation sessions in the fall for newly enrolled ELLs as well as continuing ELLs to discuss issues relevant to the upcoming school year (schedules, school events and meetings, expectations, calendar etc.), and in spring for incoming enrolled kindergarten students and any new entrants. Additionaly, in spring, parents are invited to learn about state exams and the requirements for their children. We provide translators as well as translated versions of various forms and letters. During parent orientation, administrators are introduced, and a tour of the building is given. Our staff provides a warm, respectful and welcoming atmosphere. The ELL Parent Outreach Team sends home a bi-monthly newsletter in students home languages. This newsletter informs parents of upcoming events, ways they can be involved and help their children at 2018-19 CEP 74  home, and useful websites for both parents and children. The NYC translations services are used to inform parents of mandated assessments and expectations. Our PTA is diverse and reaches out to ELL parents in an effort to encourage membership. Most of our parents attend parent-teacher conferences because we provide translators for both the afternoon and evening conferences. ELL parents are encouraged to attend literacy and math workshops given by our coaches. Our school website is available in nine different languages and provides important information about school events. Our parents are aware that translators are available at all events. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Doreen E. Murphy, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Daniel D. Thompkins School School DBN: 069 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Doreen E. Murphy Title Principal Salvatore Manuele Assistant Principal Michelle Yzaguirre Parent Coordinator Rachel Cain ENL/Bilingual Teacher Meital Elfassy Parent Corrine Caserta Teacher/Subject Area Laurie Mangialomini Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Adrienne Tiboni School Counselor Enrico Dominguez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Denise De Nicola Other Related Service Pro Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 77  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R069 School Name: Daniel D. Tompkins PS69 Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Marc Cucchia Dean No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use various methods to assess the language preferences of our parent community. The last two questions on the HLS, as well as the RHLA report gives us the necessary information. Additionally, each parent at registration completes a language preference form generated by the NYC DOE, and an Emergency Contact card available in several languages. This information is entered into ATS. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian 2 0.19 4 0.38 2018-19 CEP 78  Arabic Chinese Cantonese Hebrew Korean Mandarin 20 65 0 1 6 0 English 891 Russian Slovak 8 1 1.9 6.16 0 0.09 0.57 0 84.45 0.76 0 18 39 4 1 8 25 883 8 0 Spanish 61 6.16 65 1.71 3.7 0.38 0.09 0.76 2.37 83.7 0.76 0 6.16 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 79  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Report Cards and Teacher Conference Notices Report cards are distributed in November, March, and June. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Report cards are available in the high frequency languages. Teachers give a list of languages they need to the Parent Coordinator. Forms are available on the DOE website in the high frequency languages. Teacher conference notices are distributed in September, November, March, and June. These forms are distributed within the mandated time frame NYSITELL entitlement, continuing, and non-entitlement All mandated translated documents relating to health, safety, conduct, special education services, Bill of Rights, etc. These forms are distributed throughout the school year based on a mandated time frame. Some documents can be found already translated on the DOE intranet site. We also use the DOE translation unit as well as our own in house translation unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences, Curriculum Conferences, and Kindergarten Orientation September, November, March, May, and June P.T.A. meetings and Parent Workshops monthly Orientation for ELL parents September SLT (School Leadership Team) monthly interpretation service(s)? For all formal face to face meetings in our school translators are provided through the use of our in house translators or the DOE translation unit. For all formal face to face meetings in our school translators are provided through the use of our in house translators or the DOE translation unit. For all formal face to face meetings in our school translators are provided through the use of our in house translators or the DOE translation unit. Since any member of our school community is able to attend our Parent Coordinator will make arrangements for the parent to have a translator. We inform the parents in 2018-19 CEP 80  our note in the beginning of the year to reach out to Mrs. Yzaguirre ( Parent Coordinator) if they are in need of one. this ensures they understand all the content discussed of the meeting. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school's communication strategy to reach our limited English proficient families in the event of an emergency is to use our in house translation unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our Parent Coordinator also acts as our primary LAC. She, as well as the ENL teachers, understand the importance of communicating with our ELL families in their preferred languages. We have provided the staff with notification that any pertinent documents will be translated in the ELLs preferred language, provided that it is one of the nine most commonly primary languages. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We fulfill notification requirements by posting the Welcome Poster, having the language id cards at the security desk and main office, distributing the over the phone information, and providing a list of bilingual staff who are available to assist parents. We have a LAC to assure compliance. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The annual parent survey consistently rates us high on the parent engagement section. Our ENL teacher also monitors parent satisfaction and further needs. 2018-19 CEP 81 
