2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R072 School Name: I.S. 072 ROCCO LAURIE Principal: JESSICA JACKSON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Police Officer Rocco Laurie, IS 72 353100010072 6,7 & 8 School Number (DBN): 31R072 33 Ferndale Avenue, Staten Island, New York, 10314 718-698-5757 Phone Number: 718-761-5928 Fax: Jessica Jackson JJackson13@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jessica Jackson Mike Sims CristaEckman Jessica Jackson CristaEckman Tom Eagan Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Ms. VincenzaGallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace VGallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) District 31 FSC: Executive Director: Exec. Supt. Anthony Lodico 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island, New york 10313 Executive Superintendent Anthony Lodico alodico@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5657 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jessica Jackson Mike Sims CristaEckman n/a Regina Miller n/a n/a Lissa Ambrosino Clifford Hagen Christine LaPointe *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Teacher Member/ Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Princey Goonewardene Jessica Francis Aysen Akturk Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Vision Section 4: CEP Overview Rocco Laurie is committed to engaging our students to be leaders in a learning environment rich in instructional rigor that meets students at their various entry points, while providing them with the social emotional learning to cultivate their unique attributes in a culturally responsive manner. 2018-19 CEP 9  We do this by creating brave spaces within the school community that celebrate equity, excellence, empathy, and inspire students to reach their optimal potential both academically and personally. Mission Rocco Laurie is dedicated to empowering, educating and enlightening our future student leaders to become strong global citizens by inspiring a love of learning, embracing the full richness and diversity of our community, and nurturing their social/emotional well-being. Theory of Action/Instructional Focus If teachers work collaboratively to unpack the standards and engage students in the formative assessment process, THEN students will take ownership of their learning, through peer and self-assessment, in a student-centered learning environment. The focus on feedback implementation will support students toward skill mastery. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Rocco Laurie is a zoned, mid-island, intermediate school on Staten Island. The Principal (I.A.), Jessica Jackson, has been leading I.S. 72 since September 5, 2018. The Rocco Laurie staff was rated "proficient" in areas regarding collaboration and creating a supportive environment on our 2017-18 Quality Review. Students articulate from our five feeder schools which are PS. 69, PS 58, PS 54, PS 26 and PS 60. Our population of 1500 children (48.55% females and 51.45% males) consists of:Asian: 22% , African American: 5% |,Hispanic: 22% ,White: 50%, Student with Special Needs: 24%, and English Language Learners: 5%. We offer a variety of programs besides heterogeneous classes to meet the needs of our children: ASD Horizon, Nest, ESL, ICT, SETSS, 12:1, 12:1:1 (self-contained), and Specialized Program (honors). In the past few years we have established several partnerships with other schools on Staten Island in order to provide our students with the highest quality education and adequately prepare them for High School. 1. Port Richmond High School- a teacher exchange program where all our Mathematics and Social Studies teachers spent time at the high school level observing 9th grade classes. They also spent time with those teachers learning about the 9th grade curriculum and standards. The teachers from Port Richmond were then given the same opportunity to spend time at 72 observing 8th grade classes and professional development offered to our staff. 2. Susan Wagner High School- A similar exchange program, this time for Foreign Language teachers from Wagner. 3. Bernstein Intermediate School- Our Science Teachers and IS 7 collaborated to begin to unpack the new standards from New York State. 4- The World Language School in Long Island- Select foreign Language teachers visited there to observe how they approached the teaching of Spanish and Italian. 5- United Activities Unlimited- College access for all students in the 7th grade. 2018-19 CEP 10  6. Our Horizon ASD program continues to work with New Dorp on seamlessly transitioning our students into High School. 7. Three of our Assistant Principals participate in the District AP Learning Cohort and partner collectively with over fifteen District 31 Schools in collaborating and sharing best practice. Ms. Passantino works with PS 30, PS 45, PS 50, PS 57, Curtis HS; Mr. Rocco collaborates with PS 16, PS 30, PS 42, PS 57, PS 69, PRHS, and Susan Wagner HS; Ms. Movsesian teamed up with PS 44, PS 4, PS 45, PRHS, Curtis HS and PS 50. 8. Partnered with I.S. 75 to begin Impact Teams in 2018-2019 This past year, we rolled out the Leader in Me Initiative to the students. Every student received instruction in the Seven Habits on Mondays. Through this initiative, we created multiple student actions teams. Students signed up for action teams and used their habits to become involved in a cause, work with others and make the community better. Our school partnered with many community based charities such as Gianna Nicole's Heart of Home, Autism Speaks, Teens for Jeans (homeless shelters), Project Hospitality BaggedLu``nches, Lustgarten Foundation Pancreatic Cancer, Alzheimer's Association, Sandy Claus project, Multiple Sclerosis (national MS Society). The Save the Animals Student Action Team collaborated with Fur Friends in need and we fostered our first puppy this past spring. We teamed up with PS6, PS32 and PS 42 and collected thousands of items for the animal shelters. Lunch & Learn tutoring session were created by students to support their peers academically. Students utilized the library during their lunch period to eat and tutor or be tutored in a major subject. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We offer a variety of programs besides heterogeneous classes to meet the needs of our students. Classes include Integrated Co- Teaching, SETSS, Honors, self contained 12:1, 12:1:1, Nest and Horizon 8:1:1. We also offer support to students with IEP related services for physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech and guidance as well as at risk counseling. RTI is provided by our IEP teacher, Math coach and ELA coach. Through a grant with School Mental Health, we hired a counselor from the Jewish Board 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Promote higher level of student thinking A major initiative for this year was for the common planning teams to be self-sufficient and teacher led. Instead of coaches or administrators facilitating the meetings we are empowering teachers to take on leadership roles on a rotating basis. Each of the teams know that if they require assistance at a particular meeting the assistant principals and coaches will always be available to assist in any way possible. During these common planning sessions teachers analyze curriculum, lesson plans, student work and assessments and record a snapshot of their work on an ongoing daily agenda that is shared with and visible to all team members via Google Docs. Teams started the year by analyzing our student’s initial progress monitoring data and baselines to look for trends, strengths and weaknesses across classes and grade levels. In addition, this past September, each of our students participated in an online survey to determine which type of learner they are. The results were then sorted by class, posted in Google and given to each of their teachers. This information was used to help our staff to drive instruction in future lessons and units. Additionally, teachers use common planning to “norm” grading of school-wide performance tasks and assessments to ensure a fair and unbiased grading of student work. Lastly, teacher teams have used common planning to share best practices and receive content specific PD. 2018-19 CEP 11  Initiatives for 2018-2019 Our CEP Goals: 1. By June 2019, teacher teams will work together during common planning time and on the Instructional Team, to unpack Common Core Learning Standards while cross walking Next Generation Learning Standards to improve rigorous instruction in lesson plans, performance tasks and rubrics, as measured by 3% increase on the Math and ELA state exam. (Rigorous Instruction) 2. By June 2019, we will implement a full school PBIS model that encourages and supports the social emotional life of our children, resulting in an improvement to the overall tone and culture in the building, measured by a 3 % decrease in overall suspensions. (Supportive Environment) 3. By June 2019, we will launch one vertical core impact team, enabling teachers to work collaboratively, around the EAA protocol and formative assessment process, which will result in a 3% gain in students performing at level 3 and 4. (Collaborative Teachers) 4. By June 2019, we will increase teacher, student, and peer assessment by implementing a professional development plan that builds teacher capacity to use the formative assessment process, resulting in a 10% increase, in the number of teachers who improve by one performance level, as reflected in assessment, component 3D, in Advance. (Effective School Leadership) 5. By June of 2019 , we intend to create successful school-parent/ community partnerships measured by an 10% increase in parents who agree or strongly agree on the NYC Learning Environment Survey. (Strong Family-Community Ties) 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R072 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1416 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 118 119 14 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 65 61 26 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 64.0% % Attendance Rate 57.1% % Reduced Lunch 5.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 26.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 44.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.08 1% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 56.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 148 148 93.6% 7.1% 20.7% 4.7% 22.5% 1.3% 8 33% 5.9 45.7% 68% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A YES NO NO YES N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Conduct a comprehensive assessment of your school’s academic program in response to this element of the Framework for Great Schools rigorous Instruction. This assessment should be informed by an analysis of student performance trends and any major findings from your Quality Review (QR) and/or other relevant data. Summarize your school’s strengths and needs relative to this element (in a narrative or bullet format), and identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. Cite all data trends and sources.  Our schools strength's based on Rigorous Instruction, as indicated by our 2017-2018 Quality Review, is in 1.1. (Proficient). Our most QR indicated evidence that teachers are making curricular decisions towards further aligning curriculum maps to reinforce concepts connected to Common Core Learning Standards. Curricula and lesson plans reflect tasks which include a focus on citing text evidence in support of claims and contains several prompts or questions that could lead to reasoning and analysis. The planning of rigorous tasks and purposeful decision making is building coherence while promoting career and college awareness for all students across grades and subjects. The priority need that will be addressed in the goal and action plan is to improve our Area of Focus 1.2 Pedagogy (Developing) as indicated in our QR feedback 2017-2018. Teacher practices have yet to consistently reflect practices aligned to the school's core beliefs on rigorous questioning and student-to student discussion and engagement. Additionally, strategies and scaffolds have yet to be implemented regularly across all grades and classrooms, providing multiple entry points into challenging tasks. A method of tracking progress is also necessary. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1. By June 2019, teachers will work together during common planning time and on the Instructional Team, to unpack common core learning standards while cross walking Next Generation Learning Standards to improve rigorous instruction in lesson plans, performance tasks and rubrics, as measured by 3% increase on the Math and ELA state exam. (Rigorous Instruction) 2018-19 CEP 15 Teachers and Administration Part 3a – Action Plan  Protocols for unpacking the CCLS and the NGS will be All students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 created by teachers in their departments.  Teachers will use the unpacked standards to compare the similarities and the differences by doing a crosswalk.  The Instructional Team will continue to unpack the standards and edit the current maps to include material that meets the rigorous requirements of the CCLS and create strategies that focus on differentiating lessons for students with disabilities, as well as, general education students.  Teams of teachers will create success criteria based on the unpacked standards  Common planning sessions will allow for teacher to revise unit plans and lesson plans so that students are on track to mastery of standards.  Assessments and Performance tasks will be revised and driven by the unpacked standards.  Teachers will administer a pre test or an anticipation guide and post test surrounding the common core based units and use the results to drive instruction 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will facilitate Math and ELA workshops for parents to support them in learning the Common Core to Next Generation Standards roll-out (November-April). We will administer a needs assessment to parents to better understand their entry points around rigorous instruction (December). Teachers are available to run mini-workshops and 1:1 conferences during Tuesday Parent Engagement time (ongoing). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 80 Teachers 2 Coaches at $91,998 and 4 Assistant Principal at $124,416 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 16  After every cycle, teachers will be able to highlight the students growth and have data to support next steps. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Growth will be seen in student performance on task, exams and overall grades aligned with the goal.. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1.According to the 2017 School Survey results, 91% of families say that our school will make them aware of any emotional or psychological issues affecting their child’s academic performance. In the same survey 93% of families say that at their school their child is safe. The survey results also indicate that 95% of families say they feel respected by their child’s teachers and 90% say the principal works to create a trusting relationship with families. Our participation rate for families in the survey has increased from 73% in 2016 to 79% in 2018. 2. Students need to value and respect each other’s right to learn. In the 2017, school survey, 51% of the students say that most students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions and only 37% say that most students behave well even when the teacher isn’t watching; whereas 60% of teachers say the same. In the 2017 survey, 67% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child’s classroom, or participate in an activity with their child and only 46% say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. Quality Review scores for this element have decreased since our last review in 2014-2015. In the last review we were well-developed in how effectively our school partners with families to support student success, with a score of 4.99. In last year’s review we were proficient with a score of 3.50. In the 2017 survey 16% of parents responded that they would like to see a safer school environment. 3. We have three guidance counselors that service mandated students, as well as, at risk students and a social worker from the Jewish Board of Family Services that assists with at risk students. We have a full SAT, that sees mandated students as well as, at risk students. We have some staff members trained in TCIS. Our SAPIS worker and our Respect for All liaison work collaboratively to facilitate activities throughout the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will implement a full school PBIS model that encourages and supports the social emotional beings of our students, resulting in the overall tone and culture in the building being improved, measured by a 3 % decrease in overall suspensions. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Our local elected officials will be asked to support a variety of assemblies that focus on bullying, cyber-bullying and respect for all, for example, John Halligan, Prizmatic Laser Show, and Harlem Master's Magic Basketball Show Students with perfect attendance and students of the month will acknowledged at month grade assemblies. Students will be invited to have lunch with the principal. Students On going Administration All students June 2019 Administration, Guidance Counselors and deans Members of our school community will be trained in TCIS Staff members All Year FSC Students will be invited to join the group, "Live Your Best Life." this group will meet with the principal monthly, creating and implementing ways to increase a positive culture among the students. Monthly School Safety Committee meeting provides an opportunity for school personnel to meet and discuss the safety/security of the building. Monthly PPT meetings will be help to discuss and create interventions for at risk students Students, staff Monthly School Safety Committee Students Monthly Monthly attendance meetings are facilitated by the guidance counselors and the District Attendance Teacher to implement strategies and interventions for students who are chronically late or absent Students 2018-19 CEP 19 Administration, Guidance Counselors, Deans and SAT Guidance Counselors and  Leader In Me classes will be implemented to address student social and emotional growth. Within in this program students have the opportunity to partake in several student action teams and have the opportunity to perform community service and be honored as members of the Laurie Leadership Society. Professional Development In Leader in Me will enhance teachers and staff members capacity to foster student's social emotional growth We will implement a quote of the day. Inspirational quotes will be announced every morning, encouraging all members of our community to make good choices. All members of the community are invited to submit quotes. We will establish a relationship with the BFSC behavior specialist, LIbby Elias, to develop a whole school PBIS plan focusing on our Tier I strategies, as well as, writing and implementing FBA, (Functional Behavior Plan) and BIP, (Behavioral Implementation Plan) Students Monthly District Attendance Teacher Ongoing Administration, Staff, students Administration Teachers, staff and Leader in Me facilitators Teachers On going On going Administration, staff members, students, parents We will a close analysis of programming to ensure that students have the opportunity to go to the LRE placements and have equal access opportunities. Administration, staff members, students Students On going FSC, Administration, guidance counsorls, deans, teachers, paras, SAT Administration, programmer 2018-19 CEP 20  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students On going How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During the school year parents will be invited to visit classrooms, attend assemblies, and partake in activities to reinforce our goals. Parent Association meetings will focus on inviting guest speakers who will offer guidance to families in creating positive behavior reinforcements. Referrals will be made to outside organizations to assist families in need. These events will be on going throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Financial support will be requested from local elected officials for some activities. The PA and the Parent Coordinator will seek outside organization to volunteer personal and materials. Student schedules will be adjusted according to need, throughout the year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will see a decrease in the number of Principal's suspensions. We will also see the number of parents visiting school and classrooms for academic, as well as, social emotional reasons increase. The number of parents who attend the monthly PTA meetings will increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data indicating the number of Principal's suspensions will show a 3% decrease. The attendance records from the monthly PTA meetings will show an increase in the number of parents attending. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our 2018 Quality Review, the majority of teachers meet in professional collaborations that are connected to supporting the instructional shifts, yet the ongoing analysis of student sub-group data, including English Language Learners (ELLs) and students with disabilities across teams using inquiry-based practices is a work in progress. The priority need that will be addressed is QR indicator 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. Systems will be put into place and monitored so that: 1. the vast majority of teachers are engaged in inquiry-based, structured professional collaborations that have strengthened teacher instructional capacity and promoted the implementation of CCLS/Next Gen, resulting in school-wide instructional coherence and increased student achievement for all learners. 2. Teacher Impact Teams systematically analyze key elements of teacher work including classroom practice, assessment data, and student work for students they share or on whom they are focused, resulting in shared improvements in teacher practice and mastery of goals for groups of students. 3. Distributed leadership structures are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership and teachers play an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will launch a vertical impact team enabling teachers to work collaboratively, around the EAA protocol, which will result in a 3% gain in students performing at level 3 and 4 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will meet in each department by grade during common planning time and determine an area of need. Teachers will decide on a way to track progress through out the cycle. Teachers will develop a new focus and inquiry question every 6 weeks based on the data they collect while engaging in the EAA protocol. Students by grade in all major subjects September- June Assistant Principals and Coaches. Students by grade in all major subjects September, November, February, April Ongoing Coaches and Department APs Lead Teachers from each department and grade Lead Teachers Ongoing partnership with our coach team at I.S. 75 will provide modeling and guidance around our impact team structures and outcomes. Vertical Impact Team A teacher leader from each grade/department will meet weekly in a core Vertical Impact Team to share their findings from common planning. The minutes will be shared with the staff via Google Drive. The cabinet will follow the cycles and discuss their progress during the cabinet meetings. Teachers will be provided with next steps and professional development based on our feedback and their self-reflections. All targeted students in each class. November, February, April, June Grade/Departments Weekly Cabinet Teachers Weekly Cabinet Curricula, pacing calendars, assessments, and resources will be adjusted based on feedback after each cycle. data ongoing Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A toolkit based on our findings will be provided to all students and shared with families at PTA meetings, SLT meetings and on our website to support our goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8 teachers at $88,162, 1 Literacy Coach at $88,162 and 1 Assistant Principal at $124,802 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will progress monitor the goals weekly and the cabinet will evaluate the overall process at the end of each cycle with the teams and with administration. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers will use Google Sheets to share and track data using pre assessments, post assessments and ongoing formative assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Focus: Quality rubric indicator 5.1 Evaluate the quality of school-level decisions, making adjustments as needed to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school, with particular attention to the Next Generation Standards According to the this year's QR feedback session with the evaluator, we rated "developing" in tracking the systems that we have in place throughout the building. Strength: we have a process in place to regularly evaluate and adjust curricula and instructional practices in response to student learning needs and the expectations of the Next Generation Standards. This past year we created daily common planning periods for departments, allowing teachers to engage in looking at student work, share lesson plans, creating task, quarterly exams and projects based on the needs of our students in regards to the CCLS. The pacing calendar and unpacked standards guided the work in all departments. Area in Need: 1. a process to purposefully evaluate the quality of school culture and the ways expectations are developed and shared among school constituents, with a focus on making adjustments to support the expectations of the Next Generation Standards 2. a process to purposefully evaluate and adjust the use of organizational resources, the quality of teacher team work, and professional development practices, with particular attention to what teachers need to learn to support student mastery of the Next Generation Standards Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase teacher, student, and peer assessment by implementing a professional development plan that builds teacher capacity to use the formative assessment process, resulting in a 10% increase, in the number of teachers who improve by one performance level, as reflected in assessment, component 3D, in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will norm as a cabinet around 3d - assessment. We conducted 4 cycles of calibration around each suject, with the subject superviser leading the conversation. Administration will analyze the data from 3d after the first round of observations and discuss feedback and next steps. Teacher professional development will be provided based on the needs of the teachers and after completing a survey. The cabinet will norm before each new Advance cycle, focusing on the feedback around 3d from the previous observation to ensure cohesiveness. Sample teachers October 10, 2018 Admin All teachers observed in Advance All teachers observed in Advance All teachers observed in Advance November 30,2018 Admin December 3, 2018 Admin Every two months. Admin 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our goals will be shared with our parents at the November PTA meeting. We will also send a letter home to the parents and students so they are aware of our goals and expectations. Parents will be invited in to see formative assessment in action in the classrooms. We will share student progress in peer and self assessment at the parent teacher conferences. Instructional resources: teachers will be provided with tools from the Professional Development sessions to implement teacher,peer and self assessment. Schedule adjustments: Teachers will be scheduled to walk through. Teacher per session and per diem: Impact teams will focus on formative assessment and turnkey it to their departments. Supervision per session: Administration will work after school to support impact teams. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources: Google Drive, PD resources, cabinet meetings, schedules will incorporate common planning periods, Teams (PD teams, SLT, Impact Teams ) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Cabinet meetings will continue to be held weekly on Monday mornings. Each week we will dedicate time to review assessement and PDs. Monthly we will meet with the coaches to review PDs and teacher team progress. All cabinet meeting notes will be shared on Google. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will look at component 3d in Advance as a school and by individuals, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our current strengths as a school are: Communication with parents via pupilpath, telephone calls, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement meetings, progress reports, school messenger, school website, PTA meetings, curriculum night, High School information night, HS application clinics run on Tuesday afternoons, Monday and Thursday evenings . A top priority for the upcoming school year is to utilize our "Leader In Me" model in allowing students to take a more active leadership role within our school as well as developing our community ties with local businesses, families and community organizations which will in turn create more opportunities for families to become more involved in our school community. Better cultivating these relationship will place an emphasis on empowering the youth. During the 2016-17 school year, we have established several programs such as green team gardening, lego robotics, jazz band and dance which allowed students the opportunity to become leaders in real world settings as well as to g et students and their families involved in larger community events and philanthropic organizations. Including but not limited to the Alzheimer's walk, pediatric diabetes fundraiser, Autisim awareness, breast cancer walk, partnerships with Port Richmond night of jazz, Borough Arts festival, performances at local nursing homes, Park clean up, beautification of the school, expanding and planting vegtable gardens, etc. All of these programs were very successful and are intended to be expanded by better utilizing our students cultivating leadership opportunities while better utilizing community and parental support through. We are working towards strengthening the following areas: Parenting: Helping families establish home environments to support children as learners by better building relationships with families and creating more opportunities to get them involved in school and community activities. Communications: The use of effective forms for school-to-home- and home- to-school communications Volunteering: The recruitment and organization of the school’s volunteer program Learning at Home: Helping families assist their children with homework and recognizing other learning at home opportunities Decision making: Including parents, students, and community members in the school decision making process for activities. Collaborating with the Community: The identification and integration of resources and services from the community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 29  By June of 2019 , we intend to create successful school-parent/ community partnerships measured by an 10% increase in parents who agree or strongly agree on the NYC Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 30 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 6, 7, 8th grade , SpEd classes Sept 2018 June 2019 Administration, teachers, parents, community members, students, Borelli's office. Green Team 6,7,8th grade performing arts students Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration, NYS- DASNY grant. Sept 2018- June 2019 6, 7, 8th grade students and parents Administration , Lighthouse Team, staff, students, community organizations, PTA, parents. Lighthouse team Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Assemblyman Borelli's office will be working with our faculty in expanding and creating a school garden that can foster practical life experience in horticulture in allowing our students to grow and eat vegetables that were self produced. Allowing and fostering this opportunity will also provide a glimpse into possible careers fostering college and career readiness in agriculture. To expand the Arts programs by designing and creating a dance studio. This will include expanding the dance program by offering a variety of types of dance such as tap, lyrical, ballet, etc. Expanding the program and creating a dance room will also allow for more performances and or parent open classes to come and view the progress of their students. Creating a dance classroom will allow for cross curricular projects and productions between all the fine arts classes such as band, dance, keyboarding, chorus. Utilize the Leader In Me program to produce Student Action Teams which will allow more students the opportunities to choose where and how we join with the community for awareness, philanthropy and providing families the opportunity to partner with the school for activities to create a stronger school and parent relationship in alignment for student goals. Leader in Me training throughout the year for our parents so that they can have a greater understanding as to why the school is supporting this initiative and the impact it can have upon their children. All Parents September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Autism Speaks, Alzheimers Foundation, Project Hospitality, American Cancer Society, Community Nursing Homes, Jeans for Teens, Wounded Warriors Project, Gateway Park, Staten Island Zoo, Park clean-up and numerous other community based organizations. Partnerships with local High Schools, Wagner, Port Richmond, Moore, St. Peter's, Curtis. Our elementary feeders schools. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Grant from DASNY to construct dance room. Resources purchased by the Horticulture society such as gardening supplies, plants, seeds, bulbs. Adjusting scheduling of classes to accomodate gardening periods, collaboration with different arts classes for colloborative performances. Purchasing appropriate sheet music and costumes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 we will review all of our school and community events attendance to look for a 5% increase toward our total goal. calculate how many parents were involved as compared to our attendance last year. We plan on sending home an on-line parent survey to ask parents what activities, community projects and workshops would be most useful. We will utilize this data to better create a parent/community partnership, revise and create workshops/ clinics and create events that will have a higher percentage of parents actively engaged with their children. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets, Phone calls, logs, meetings, emails, SLT meetings. PTA meetings, curriculum night attendance, parent teacher conference attendance, open house attendance, performaing arts showcase attendance, community events outside of the building attendance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Read 180 – Remedial reading program. Afterschool Academy Remediation and Enrichment activities. United Activities Unlimited (OST) – . When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During and after school depending on the students IEP. After school-Wednesday and Thursdays- 1:30 to 3:00 PM. After School Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Wilson Language Program/ OG. Small Group, one to one. Remediation for level 1 and 2 students. Small group Homework assistance, Remediation and Enrichment activities Small group Mathematics Afterschool Academy Remediation and Enrichment activities Math Remediation for level 1 and 2 students Small Groups UAU – Homework assistance, Remediation and Enrichment activities. Science Dimension U.-online Earth Science Labs Accelerated students Small Group After school-Mondays to Fridays. From 1:30 -4:30 PM. Wednesday and Thursday afternoons- 1:30 to 3:00 After school-Mondays to Fridays. From 1:30 -4:30 PM. After School- Wednesday and Thursday afternoons- 1:30 to 3:00 2018-19 CEP 33  Social Studies N/a At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Part of the Aftterschool Academy Counseling sessions One on one After School-Wednesday and Thursday-1:30 to 3:00 PM 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 5 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our STH students receive counseling and support as needed. They all receive free lunch and free academic after school support. These students are all able to participate in our SONYC UAU Program. In addition all students receive basic emergency supplies such as student agendas, textbooks, notebooks, pens, pencils and backpacks from our Parent Coordinator. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. As per the New York City Department of Education’s hiring mandates, our school only hires individuals that are fully Certified by New York State. In addition, they must also possess the appropriate license issued by the New York City Department of Education. All newly appointed teachers must be provided Mentoring for the first two years in the system. Title 1-Highly Qualified Funding is also available for staff members to further their education, meet the State’s teaching requirements and ultimately achieve the Highly Qualified status. This particular year over 25 applicants were interviewed for our existing vacancies. The Open Market Hiring System was utilized to hire as many Highly Qualified teachers as possible. Many of those candidates came in and taught sample lessons for us during the interview process. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). This year we established a partnership with the UFT to create a "Teacher's Center' in the school. The individual that was selected began training this summer to assist with our professional development opportunities. This person will be CTLE Certified so that the staff members will recieve CTLE credit for all the professional development sessions they attend. In past years a tremendous amount of Training occurred for the New Teacher Evaluation System. Supervisors and teachers were offered Summer and Fall training in Danielson. In addition many staff members were trained in the Measures of Student Learning, MOSL) and Nextgen common core learning standards established by New York State. Professional development sessions occur each Monday during the school year. Surveys are sent out to the entire staff using Google Drive asking for areas in which they need assistance and improvement. During the these sessions they also have the ability to choose the type of professional development they wish to attend. Teachers are also required to perform three inter-visitations during the school year to observe different learning styles and techniques utilized by their colleagues. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 CEP 37  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Staff members are given input at Department Conferences in the use of appropriate assessments. They also completed a survey using Google Drive, to indicate the areas that they would like to receive professional development in and then are able to choose the sessions that they are willing to attend. This year teachers are working together on department and interdisciplinary teams to develop new quarterly assessments. All are permitted input and possess the ability to discuss the results of these assessments. This is a major step for the staff as they unpack the standards. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 CEP 38 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 810,652 0 12,366.00 793.00 8,805,046 Column A Verify with an (X) x x x Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A,5B,5C 5D and 8. Sections 5A, 5B and 6. Sections 5A,5B,5c, 5d, 5E and 6. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 39   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy The Police Officer Rocco Laurie School Parental Involvement Policy September, 2018 Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S. 72, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 2018-19 CEP 41  5. Police Officer Rocco Laurie, IS72 will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parent in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. (List actions, such as describing how the evaluation will be conducted, identifying who will be responsible for conducting it, and explaining what role parents will play) o Focus groups will be conducted with teachers, students and parents to determine what needs are being met, what challenges do we face, and how we can achieve our goals in the fall and the spring. o A survey will be conducted at the September PA meeting to determine the needs of the parents o Feeder school articulation o Title I discussion at SLT meetings Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students A. The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in this paragraph -    the State’s academic content standards the State’s student academic achievement standards the State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators 1. Portfolio Assessments 2. Periodic Assessments 3. Translation/Interpretation Services 4. High School Information Night 5. Title 1 Guidelines 6. Curriculum Night 7. Chancellor’ Promotional Policies 8. Chancellor’s Regulations/ Discipline Code School-Level Title I Parent Advisory Guidance Policy Name:The name of the Title I Parent Advisory Structure shall be: Title 1 PTA Committee of Rocco Laurie Intermediate School, IS 72. Goals and Objectives of the Parent Advisory Group: 1. To ensure effective involvement of all parents of Title I participating children and to support the partnership between other school community stakeholders (school administration and staff, parents and caregivers, School Leadership Team). 2. To involve parents of Title I participating students in an organized and timely manner with the planning, review and implementation of Title I programs and the joint development of the school parental involvement policy and the school-parent compact. 2018-19 CEP 42 3. To recruit parents of Title I participating students for involvement in professional development opportunities, participating in meetings of the Parent Committee in September, November and March of each school year, conferences and other related activities designed to enhance the role of parents in supporting the education of their children and advancing their own educational needs. 4. To provide information to parents of Title I participating students regarding Title I issues, and in consultation with other parents to bring questions, concerns, and ideas regarding Title I related issues to the attention of school staff, administration and other school community stakeholders. 5. To develop a proposed spending plan and budget in consultation with other parents of Title I participating students recommending how the school's minimum Title I 1% (up to 5%) parent involvement allocation can be best utilized to support the needs of all Title I parents. Note that if Title I parents have selected the PA as the school-level Title I Advisory structure, membership shall be defined in consistency with the requirements of the current Chancellor's Regulation A-660 (all parents, legally appointed guardian, foster parents and persons in parental relation to any child who currently attends the school. Title I Parent Advisory Structure Membership Eligibility:Membership in the Title 1 Parent Committee shall be limited to parents, legally appointed guardians, and persons in parental relation to any child who currently attends the school. Title I participating students currently attending Rocco Laurie Intermediate School, IS 72. Outreach to New Members: In the beginning of each school year, a welcoming letter from the Principal shall inform eligible parents and caregivers of all Rocco Laurie, IS 72 students, and shall encourage their participation. Voting Privileges: Each parent of a Title I participating child/children currently attending Rocco Laurie, IS 72 shall be entitled to one vote concerning Title I related matters. Officers: The officers of the Title 1 PTA subcommittee shall include the: Chairperson (assistant principal), PTA President, Vice President and Treasurer. Term of Office: The term of office shall be from July 1 to June 30th. Officers shall be elected in May of each year that elections are due. Officers shall serve a 2 year term beginning in July. Qualifications for the officer positions listed above is limited to parents, legally guardians or persons in parental relation who meet the criteria as outlined in these Guidelines and are not employed at Rocco Laurie, IS 72. 2018-19 CEP 43  Duties of Officers: The Chairperson shall: • preside at all meetings of the Title 1 PTA subcommittee and shall be an ex-officio member of all committees except the nominating committee. • appoint chairpersons of the PTA subcommittees with the approval of The PTA Executive Board, and shall appoint chairpersons of this standing committees with the approval of the PTA membership. • delegate responsibilities to other committee members and shall encourage meaningful participation in all Title 1 activities. • serve as the IS 72 representative to the District Title I Parent Committee (DPAC or Presidents' Council) and shall be required to attend all district Title I parent leader meetings. share information and provide reports to the entire Rocco Laurie membership.   meet regularly with the committee officers and membership to plan quarterly meeting agendas and other activities/events. • assist with the transfer of Title 1 committee records to the incoming officers prior to the end of his/her term of office. The Title 1 PTA Committee Vice-Chairperson shall:  assist the committee chairperson with the duties as outlined above and shall assume his/her duties his/her absence or at the committee chair person's request. The Title 1 PTA Committee Recording Secretary shall:  prepare quarterly meeting notices, agendas, sign-in sheets.   prepare and read the draft minutes at monthly PTA meetings and make minutes available upon request.• record the minutes at all the committees meetings.  share responsibility with other PTA officers for safeguarding all Of the Title 1 PTA Committee records sign and incorporate all amendments to these guidelines and ensure that they are maintained in the file of the PTA Office.  provide access to all PTA members to information related to Title I compliance including the following documents (e.g., School and District Parent Involvement Policies, Department of Education Title I Parent Involvement Guidelines, Title I Non-Regulatory Guidance, Federal Law, Section 1118, NYSED Parents Right-to-Know documents) 2018-19 CEP 44   assist with the transfer of Title 1 PTA Committee records to the incoming PTA officers prior to the end of his/her term of office. The Title 1 PTA Committee Treasurer shall: • be responsible for coordinating and drafting a proposed budget and spending plan for the Title I parent involvement allocation (minimum of 1%, maximum of 5%), for approval by the PTA membership and School Leadership Team. • be responsible, with the Title 1 PTA Committee Chairperson, for presenting the membership approved proposed budget and spending plan to the School Leadership Team as the recommendation for use of these funds to support Title I parent involvement • assist with the transfer of Title 1 PTA Committee records to the incoming Title 1 PTA Committee officers prior to the end of his/her term of office. Parental Involvement and School Quality  The school will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement, and will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition: 1. that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning; 2. that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; 3. Parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 of the ESSA. 4. The school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the State. 1. Police Officer Rocco Laurie, IS72 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under section 1112 of the ESSA: (List actions) o Administration will attend monthly PA meetings and address parent concerns o Consult with the parents to decide the most effective way to spend the allocated money o Meet with the parents whenever needs arise. 2. Police Officer Rocco Laurie, IS72 will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of the ESSA: (List actions) o Meetings with the PA Executive Board o Monthly SLT meetings o Title I Parent Advisory Committee Meetings 3. Police Officer Rocco Laurie, IS72 will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: (List activities) o Meeting with the PA Executive Board o Monthly SLT meetings o Title I parent Advisory Committee Meetings 3. The school will incorporate this parental involvement policy into its school improvement plan. 2018-19 CEP 45  o In carry out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing information and school reports required under section 1111 of the ESSA in an understandable and uniform format and including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language parents understand. o The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs in decisions about how the 1 percent of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. o provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; o host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child's class and to observe classroom activities, as follows:  As stated above, our parents are involved in every aspect of the school day. Parents are encouraged to serve as chaperones on school trips, participate in all fundraising events and are invited to watch and sit in on the child’s classes whenever they request to Review and Amendments to Title 1 PTA Committee Guidance Document • This Title 1 PTA Committee Guidance document should be reviewed annually to ensure that they remain current with State, Federal and Department of Education requirements and continue to meet the needs of the entire membership. • Proposed amendments shall be presented in writing to the Title I parent community prior to any vote taken to adopt the amendment(s). Adopted amendments shall be attached to this document and remain on file in the main office and the PTA office. • This Title 1 PTA Committee Guidance document shall be distributed to all parents of Title I eligible children who attend Rocco Laurie, IS 72 and shall be signed below in order to verify the date of general distribution to the Rocco Laurie parent community. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Rocco Laurie School INTERMEDIATE SCHOOL 72 Jessica Jackson, Principal (I.A.) 2018-19 CEP 46  SCHOOL-PARENT COMPACT As Per Title I Requirements September 2018 I.S. 72,, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Required School- Parent Compact Provisions School Responsibilities: 2. Hold parent-teacher conferences periodically, during which this compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child's achievement. Specifically those conferences will be held: - In September of each school year we will discuss in detail the school wide programs offered utilizing Title I funding. Parents will be notified of the registration procedures for the Afterschool and Saturday Academies and be issued an annual schedule of the classes being offered. - At each PTA meeting there will be a portion devoted to the Title 1 activities and funding status. - At each of the School Leadership Team meetings, Title 1 funding will be discussed. - At the final PTA meeting in May, the membership will vote on Title 1 subcommittee membership and the proposal for the School wide Programs. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum The Rocco Laurie School will:  Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the rigorous academic standards as set forth by the New York State Education Department and the Department of Education of the City of New York.  Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught for four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the Title I Final Regulations (67 Fed. Reg. 71710, December 2, 2002). 2018-19 CEP 47   Provide to parents of participating children information in a timely manner about Title I, Part A programs that includes a description and explanation of the school's curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure children's progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet.  Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Police Officer Rocco Laurie, IS 72 will coordinate and integrate Title I parental involvement strategies with parental involvement strategies under the following other programs Saturday (Principal’s) Academy  Read 180  Wilson Program  After School Academy   After School Center (Children’s Aid Society)  Regent’s Prep classes  Parent Workshops  Children’s Aid Society  Supplemental Educational Providers 1. Provide parents with frequent reports on their children's progress. Specifically, the school will provide the I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships following reports: 2. Quarterly student report cards 3. Quarterly student progress reports 4. New York State Examination Scores 5. Acuity reports/Interim assessment reports 6. School Report Card 7. Title 1 Parent Letter (January) 8. Provide all students with Student Planners so that parents can be informed of all aspects of their child’s daily progress. 9. Pupilpath will be utilized and updated daily Staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff At IS 72 we have established an “Open Door Policy”. Parents are encouraged to come up at any time to speak to their child’s Assistant Principals, Deans and teachers. In addition, parents can contact our parent coordinator at any time to request a meeting with the entire team of teachers any Tuesday afternoon from 1:30 to 2:10 PM. All this is in addition to the designated parent-teacher conference days established and scheduled by the Chancellor’s Office. On the request of parents, provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children. The school will respond to any such suggestions as soon as practicably possible. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 1. 2. Involve parents in the planning, review, and improvement of the school's parental involvement policy, in an organized, ongoing, and timely way. Involve parents in the joint development of any school wide program plan, in an organized, ongoing, and timely way. 3. Hold an annual meeting to inform parents of the school's participation in Title I, Part A programs, and to explain the Title I, Part A requirements, and the right of parents to be involved in Title I, Part A programs. The school will convene the meeting at a convenient time to parents, and will offer a flexible number of additional 2018-19 CEP 48  parental involvement meetings, such as in the morning or evening, so that as many parents as possible are able to attend. The school will invite to this meeting all parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs (participating students), and will encourage them to attend. 4. Provide information to parents of participating students in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon the request of parents with disabilities, and, to the extent practicable, in a language that parents can understand. 5. Provide to each parent an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State assessment in at least math, language arts and reading. 6. Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities I will attend PTA meeting whenever possible. 1. 2. Participate in Parent-teacher conferences to stay informed of my child’s progress. 3. Respond to the teachers in a timely fashion. 4. Attend team meetings when requested. 5. 6. Check my child’s student planner each day to make sure all assignments are completed. Insist that my child hand to me all school notices. III. Student Responsibilities We, as students of the Rocco Laurie School, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State's high standards. Specifically, we will: 1. Pay attention in class and take all the required notes. 2. Come to school prepared for class. 3. Adhere to the School’s Discipline Code 4. Volunteer to attend the After school and Saturday Academies if I need additional help. 5. Always represent IS 72 in a positive manner. 6. Use our student planners as instructed by our teachers. 7. Keep our parents informed of school events by giving them all the school notices. 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: I.S. 72 has a large number of English Language Learners who are not showing as much growth on the NYS ELA exam and NYSESLAT, as we would like. As a result, we will offer an after school academy for these students, which will help them improve their scores on the standardized tests, as well as, increase their English proficiency levels. When reviewing the NYSITELL results, the ENL teacher, along with literacy and math coaches, noted that our students performed better in the areas of listening and speaking. Out of 22 points in the speaking part, our students scored 15 points or above. Out of 16 points in the listening portion of the test, our students scored close to 10 points. On the other side, the scores in reading and writing were low. None of our students scored above 10 points in writing. NYSITELL data indicates that many students come in with a basic skill of speaking limited English and they can read and write in rudimentary English but they do require explicit targeted instruction in reading and writing. NYSESLAT data reveals similar pattern. Out of 79 students who took NYSESLAT last year, 21 of them scored at the commanding level of English proficiency, 41 of them scored at the expanding level of English proficiency, 13 transitioning, 4 emerging, and 0 entering. Out of all the students who took the NYSESLAT, there were only 4 who score above 10 points in the writing part. Unfortunately, most of the scores were below 6 points (33 students received a score of 5 or below). The same is true with the reading portion of the test, where the scores were quite low. For example, 25 students received the score of 15 and below, while only 3 students were close to the score of 24 points. And again, the data reveals that out learners have strong speaking and listening skills, but need more reinforcement in reading and writing. This trend is evident across all grade levels. Our students are succeeding in getting proficient scores in listening and speaking, while still struggling with reading and, especially, writing. - We are planning to send invitations to our ELLs in grades 6th, 7th, and 8th (there are currently 70 ELLs enrolled in our school), hoping many of them will sign up for this program. However, we will especially encourage those students who have come to United States within the last 3 years (newcomers), as well as students who have been identified as long term ELLs. - An after school academy will run from November 7 to June 5, excluding school holidays. The class will meet two times a week (Wednesdays and Thursdays) from 1:30-3:00 (the students are dismissed at 1:28 p.m.) The total number of sessions will be 56. - All instruction will be given in English, with the implementation of native language support, when possible. - The classes will be taught by two teachers: our 2 certified ENL teachers, Mrs. Brzezinski and Ms. Rosen, and a content area teacher. We will group our ELLs into two groups: entering - 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information emerging and transitioning - expanding. ELA teacher will work on reading comprehension and writing. ENL teacher will focus mostly on vocabulary development, enhancement of listening and speaking skills. For science after school classes, the science teacher will work on investigating skills and exploring concepts, while the ENL teacher supports with vocabulary and listening and speaking skills. All teachers will work closely together to meet the needs of all learners and plan the lessons considering these needs. - Title III funds will be used to purchase the following materials and supplies for the after school academy. These materials will be supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction: a) Scholastic News articles subcriptions b) "Inside - Language, Literacy, and Content" (Level A and B) by National Geographic This program offers individualized, content-based instruction for newcomers, beginning, intermediate, early advanced, and advanced English language learners (ELLs). I.S. 72 decided to use National Geographic company’s program “Inside – Language, Literacy, and Content” (Levels A and B) to provide solutions for our ELLs. “Inside” series provides materials that promote the development of academic language through content area instruction and explicit instruction, in which the teacher identifies a specific strategy for students, then models exactly where, how, and why to apply the strategy to get meaning from a reading passage. The program covers all standards in language and literacy with connections to content. Reading selections reflect a diversity of cultures and perspectives, genres capture, and hold students’ interest. Level A of "Inside - Language, Literacy, and Content" will be used for students who are at the beginning and low intermediate stages of language development. This level is specifically designed for the learners who need sequential work in phonemic awareness, phonics, decoding, and spelling, as well as foundational work in vocabulary, language, and writing. Explicit instruction helps students develop reading and spelling skills that lead to independence. Many of the activities involve manipulatives and visual aids. Level B of "Inside - Language, Literacy, and Content" will be used for the high intermediate and advanced learners who need intensive work to build academic vocabulary and language, to learn reading strategies, and to develop skills in comprehension, literary analysis, and writing. The learning strategies cover all four modalities: listening, reading, speaking, and writing, but are not limited to the analysis of morphemes, learning grammar rules and sentence structure, presenting information in the graphic organizers, making inferences and predictions, using context clues to figure out the meaning of unknown words, cause an effect, summarizing the stories/passages, drawing conclusions, and so on. Scholastic News is a great program for ELLs. We believe that this program is an excellent choice for our students in an after school academy, since it teaches current events and has students practicing listening, reading, speaking, and writing skills. a) Additionally, we plan to purchase "Continental Press's Empire State NYSELAT" review books in preparation for the NYSESLAT. b) The school will also purchase bilingual dictionaries for the students to be used during this program. c) We are also planning end-off-year "get together for children and parents." Therefore, some funds will be spent on snacks and refreshments served during this event. d) Sessions will be devoted to preparing the students for the 8th grade science exam All records will be maintained in the following ways: a) Students' attendance will be taken every day and recorded on the attendance sheet. It will be maintained by the ENL department and administration. b) Program notifications will be distributed to the parents in the parents' preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: There is a tremendous need for all our teachers of the Ell students to properly design their lessons with the Ells in mind. We intend to facilitate professional development opportunities to all teachers who service the Ells. The purpose of these offerings will be the enhancement and support of our instruction to improve the teaching and learning across the content areas. Our three ENL teachers, Mrs. Brzezinski, Mrs. Villatoro, and Ms. Rosen, will facilitate these professional development sessions. They will offer five training sessions throughout the school year. Each of the sessions will be held on Tuesday afternoons for 40 minutes, from 1:30 to 2:10. The topics and dates are listed below. September 25, 2018- The identification and placement of the ELLS at IS 72. November 20, 2018- Understanding Second Language Acquisition. January 22, 2019- ESL strategies and techniques for the classroom teacher. February 26, 2019- Assessment strategies for the ELLs. March 26, 2019- Overview of the NYSESLAT examinations. These sessions are open to all classroom teachers and at no cost to our program. Per session cost will be picked up by our Achieve Now Grant. All records of these sessions, including Agendas and attendance will be maintained by the members of the ENL Department and the school's administration. It is our belief that these PD opportunities will have a positive impact on the progress of our ELL population. Staff members attending will be better prepared to meet the needs of our students and be more familiar with the strategies needed to best educate our students and help them in the transition from intermediate school to high school. Our ENL teacher working in the Title III program will receive ongoing professional development throughout the year. She will attend a variety of meetings, workshops, online PDs offered by DOE and Division of English Language Learners and Student Support. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental involvement positively influences children's education. It not only improves student behavior and attendance, but also positively affects student achievement. Our school strongly believes that student success is a shared benefit for both the parents and school. For these reasons, we want our parents to be involved in the learning process through a variety of activities offered for them throughout the year. These are the specific activities we will conduct for the ELL parents: - The school will offer information sessions open to all parents of ELLs who have their children signed up for our after school program, beginning in November and ending in May. We will offer five sessions throughout the year. At these monthly meetings, parents will explore: 1. Using Scholastic News and " Inside - Language, Literacy, and Content", and other resources to enhance ELLs' education at home (November) 2. Common Core Learning Standards and successful study habits for ELLs and strategies that help ELLs in school (January) 3. The NYS ELA exam format and tips (February) 4. The NYS Math exam format and tips (March) 5. The NYSELAT exam (April) 6. An overview of the upcoming school year and review of the summer reading expectations (May). These activities will be provided by one of our certified ENL teachers. These meetings will take place, for an hour, before the monthly PTA meetings from 6:30 to 7:30 p.m. Parents will receive notification of these meetings via notices and Pupil Path in the parents' preferred languages. - Title III will also provide translation services as needed. Any handouts, forms, or documents will be distributed to the parents in the parents' preferred language if needed. All the meetings with the parents will be conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the parents' preferred language if needed, too. When available, in-house staff will conduct translations of letters. If in-house staff members are not available, then the Translation & Interpretation Unit or outside vendors will be contacted. Any requests for these services are submitted at least two weeks prior to when they are needed, in order to ensure its timely distribution to parents. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities - We are also planning end-off-year "get together for children and parents" for the parents/guardians of our ELL students. This event will be held in the beginning of June in the afternoon. Snacks and refreshments will be served. The invitations will be sent to the parents in the preferred language of communications if needed. Records of parents' attendance, agendas, and invitations in parents' preferred languages will be maintained by the ENL department and administration. . Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Travel Other TOTAL $12,366 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name P.O. Rocco Laurie Intermediate School Borough Staten Island School Number 072 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jessica Jackson Coach T. Aiello ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher A. Brzezinski, L. Rosen, L.Vil Teacher/Subject Area E. McLoughlin/LA Teacher/Subject Area C. Manzo/Math Related-Service Provider J. Pietrunti/Sp. Ed. Superintendent V. Gallassio Assistant Principal Mary Curran Coach A. Rizzo School Counselor M. Karasinski Parent C. Eckman Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member K. Sievers Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1443 2018-19 CEP 57 Total number of ELLs 70 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.85%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school utilizes DRA assessments to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. It determines whether students are reading on, above, or below grade level. The data gives the ENL teachers, as well as the subject teachers, insight into the students’ literacy skills and allows them to provide the appropriate level of material to the student. By knowing student DRA levels, teachers can plan for guided reading instruction, small group, and supplemental support. The ENL teachers analyze the data patterns across proficiency levels, along with the math and literacy coaches. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? This effort is supported by various structures in place. The teachers use Ed Performance as a tool to collect data. The ENL teachers analyze data patterns to assess student proficiency. Another assessment we constantly refer to is the NYSESLAT exam. We look closely at each child’s results from the four modalities. It is especially helpful, since the NYSESLAT does not test content knowledge; but rather it is tied to linguistic demands that students need to understand and use in order to meet 2018-19 CEP 58 Common Core Learning Standards across all content areas. The NYSESLAT Target of Measurement document describes what students should be able to do at each proficiency level. This data drives out instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Several assessments are used to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need. The Ed Performance series assessments are administered multiple times per year to assess student growth and learning. The ELL Periodic Assessments are a valuable tool as well, to both the school leadership and teachers. They allow teachers and administrators the opportunity to focus the necessary time and resources in indicated areas of deficiency as indicated by the predictive exam. They give information on how students did individually and as a group in each modality. Patterns across the NYSESLAT modalities have a tremendous effect on instructional decisions. The ENL teachers examine the data that helps drive instruction. From the exam, we can see where students are struggling and plan out the appropriate instruction for them. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data is gathered, the ENL teachers, along with coaches and other teachers, examine the data to address interventions. This allows the teachers to focus instruction in those areas of weakness, what instructional needs should be stressed, and what kind of instruction students will receive. The ENL teachers collaborate with the subject area teachers to decide on modifications to the instruction of ELLs in the classroom. Data has revealed that our learners have strong speaking and listening skills, but need more reinforcement in reading and writing. This trend is evident across all grade levels, especially with writing. The ENL teachers meet with the students’ other teachers to discuss and work on differentiated material for individual students. Teachers assign differentiated writing assignments for select students and, in some cases, assign writing that can be produced in the students’ home language, as well as, English. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Various assessments are used to evaluate and inform ELL programs. We look carefully at the growth that the students make on the NYSESLAT exam, their performance in the classroom, and their performance on NYS exams. We look to see how many students progress on this year’s NYSESLAT exam. Analyzing the results and knowing the child’s proficiency level, we are able to modify our lessons to the students’ linguistic needs. For example, our instructional plan for students receiving services between 0-3 years is heavily based on vocabulary building for these learners. We use a lot of visuals, pictures, sentence starters, and modified writing prompts to facilitate understanding. Background knowledge is also taken into consideration. On the other hand, for the advanced students, those who have been receiving ENL services for more than 3 years, we focus more on the grammar rules, writing skills, and reading comprehension skills. When examining results from NYS exams, the patterns across all proficiency and grade levels seem to be consistent. ELLs tend to do better on the NYS Math exam and continue to struggle on the NYS ELA exam. Since the ELA exam is not available in their native language, it is difficult to determine if an ELL does better taking an exam in his or her language. Even though the math exam is available in limited languages, students seem to do better on the math exam, regardless. We use these results to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Based on the data, the ENL teachers found that the ELL students have strong speaking and listening skills, but require more assistance with reading and writing. Our programs will be adjusted to meet these needs. Reading passages will be differentiated based on appropriate levels. Websites, such as Newsela and ReadWorks, will be used to assist in leveled reading comprehension and strategies. For writing, additional short responses will be used in conjunction with reading passages. Also, graphic organizers and sentence starters will provide extra support for students who are struggling. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered through both standalone ENL and integrated ENL depending on a students' proficiency levels. The classes are ungraded and heterogeneous in the standalone ENL, while in the integrated ENL, the classes are graded and heterogeneous. Our ENL teachers closely collaborate with other classroom teachers to plan and align the lessons toward the needs and varying levels of English proficiency of all ELLs. Stand alone model is delivered by our certified ENL teachers, where the students are being pulled out of classes to receive the mandated services. Its purpose is to help students to develop English language skills that are needed to succeed in core subjects. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teachers do individualized programming for standalone ENL based on the student's proficiency level as well as his or her IEP (where applicable). Integrated ENL is delived by co-teaching by certified ENL teachers and a certified content area teacher (ELA teacher). There are two ENL teachers servicing 70 ELLs and 44 former ELLs. The teachers’ schedule are based on their students' programs. Student and teacher schedules reflect the mandated amount of time according to proficiency level. Entering and emerging ELLs receive 180 minutes a week of standalone ENL and 180 minutes a week of integrated ENL (total of 360 minutes of ENL a week). Transitioning ELLs receive 90 minutes a week of standalone ENL and 90 minutes a week of integrated ENL (total of 180 minutes weekly). Expanding ELL students receive 180 minutes a week of integrated ENL instruction. Finally, commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL in ELA or content area class. The programmer ensures that the proper instructional minutes are entered in STARS. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The students receive the majority of their content area instruction from the certified content area teachers in English. All of the teachers are aware of the ELLs in their classrooms as well as their proficiency levels. They differentiate their content area instruction in order to accommodate the needs of the students. They utilize visual aids and scaffold learning with the ELLs in mind. Whenever possible, textbooks are provided to the students in their native language. For example, Spanish science and social studies textbooks are being used during science and social studies classes. When textbooks are not available in their native language, students are permitted to leave a copy at home for reference and reinforcement of the day's lesson. Classroom libraries have been supplemented with novels in the students' native language. Students also use side by side glossaries in science, social studies, and math when they are available in their home language. In addition, content subject teachers stay in touch with the ENL teachers in regards to teaching strategies and differentiating instruction to better serve the ELLs. The ENL teachers also provide the professional development sessions to all staff members throughout the year. The purpose of these workshops is to enhance and support ELL instruction in order to improve teaching and learning across all content areas. 2018-19 CEP 60  Our teachers teach core rigorous instruction that promotes oral language development that is rich in both language and content. We believe that providing our ELLs with well-developed oral language will help them succeed in all content subjects. Various instructional methods are used to make content comprehensible to enrich language development. All these methods are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards and include: building background knowledge, teaching vocabulary strategies (through visuals, pictures, realia), guided reading, shared reading, Total Physical Response, the SIOP model during instruction, graphic organizers, and language frames, and so on. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students whose native language is Spanish are are given the Spanish LAB during the same 10-day testing window. Depending on the results of the NYSITELL, students use resources in translation. Teachers translate exams for students in the beginning but then the focus is on language acquisition. Native language support is also provided through the use of Bilingual glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, and books. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for ELLs based on their proficiency level as well as grade level and years of service. a. Presently there are no SIFEs at the school, however in the past SIFE students have been encouraged to attend the Achieve Now after school academy, as well as the after school programs. This student was also encouraged to attend the ESL Summer Success Academy at IS 72 during the summer. Weekly contact is maintained with the parent to ensure this child’s acclimation and success. Also, we emphasized the development of academic literacy skills in native language (if possible) and English, building background knowledge, using different methods that led to the mastery of English language. b. All newcomers are receiving at minimum 360 minutes of instruction in ENL (180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL a week). Additionally, they are paired with another student who speaks their language and act as a liaison between the students and their teachers. The students utilize BrainPOP ELL to expedite English proficiency. As per NCLB, after one year students are required to take the ELA exam. As a result, the ENL teachers expose the students to the format of the exam and work in collaboration with the child’s Language Arts teacher (co-teaching) in order to provide the students with the necessary tools to succeed on the exam. Also, the emphasis is put on Basic Interpersonal Communications Skills which helps a child to communicate on a daily basis. Visuals, pictures, charts, picture dictionaries, glossaries, bilingual dictionaries are also provided to these students. c. In order to avoid the students becoming Long-Term ELLs, the ENL teacher is mindful of those students who have been serviced in an ENL program for 4-6 years. These students receive small group tutoring in literacy and utilize the web-based English language learning program, BrainPOP ELL. The students are encouraged to attend the Achieve Now after school program. Additionally, we emphasize their reading and writing development in English. The focus for these students is to successfully complete a piece of writing. Therefore, we emphasize stages of the writing process and correct syntax. In order to help these students to develop their reading skills, students are exposed to the stories from all genres, which are read in class, examined, and discussed thoroughly. Pre- teaching vocabulary learning plays a vital role as well. d. The Long-Term ELLs are also encouraged to attend all of the after school programs available to them. The ENL teachers maintain regular contact with their content area teachers as well as their related service providers in order to monitor progress outside of the ENL classroom. These students utilize the web-based English language learning program, BrainPOP ELL. Also, the teachers work on reading and writing skills with these students. The focus is also on vocabulary. e. For the former ELLs, we provide testing accommodations and continued use of Native Language Support. The students still receive mandated 90 minutes of integrated ENL a week, where the ENL teachers push into the ELA class to continue to use successful ENL teaching strategies with them. The students use bilingual glossaries and are given modified time on state exams. We also emphasize study skills and test prep to help these students succeed on standardized tests. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 CEP 61  The ENL teachers work in conjunction with the Special Education teachers in order to provide the most effective instruction for the ELL students who have been identified as having special needs. The teachers are provided with the NYSESLAT samplers and use them as a vehicle for instruction. ELL-SWDs utilize the Attanasio & Associates Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT review books to familiarize students with the format of the NYSESLAT exam. These students also use READ 180 to improve their literacy skills. Both the ENL teachers and teachers of the ELL-SWDs scaffold the material. They model reading and writing strategies and provide students with appropriately grade leveled materials. In addition, teachers employ many instructional strategies, such as the use of graphic organizers, visuals, games, and reading-aloud in order to provide engaging lessons. Technology is frequently used during class time. Modified writing prompts and writing templates are offered to these learners. We also provide just-right books or a variety of articles that are more closely aligned to students' reading levels to support content knowledge and reading skills. All students with disabilities have also access to bilingual dictionaries, glossaries in math, science, and social studies, textbook in the children's native languages, as well as novels in the children's native languages. For entering and emerging students with disabilities, the emphasis is put on Basic Interpersonal Communications Skills which helps them to communicate on a daily basis. Visuals, pictures, charts, picture dictionaries, glossaries, bilingual dictionaries are also provided to these students. For transitioning and expanding ELL-SWDs, we emphasize their reading and writing development in English. The focus for these students is to successfully complete a piece of writing. Therefore, we emphasize stages of the writing process and correct syntax. In order to help these students to develop their reading skills, students are exposed to the stories from all genres, which are read in class, examined, and discussed thoroughly. Pre- teaching vocabulary learning plays a vital role as well. Our commanding ELL-SWDs benefit the most from expanding on their vocabulary, reading strategies, and writing skills. We also emphasize study skills and test prep to help these students succeed on standardized tests. We look closely at each child's IEP to ensure that they receive all services, modifications, and accommodations mandated on their IEPs. The programmer ensures that the proper instructional minutes are entered in STARS. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Class placement of the ELL-SWDs is done in the least restrictive manner on an individualized basis and based on their IEP. Child's disability is recommended by the school support team in consultation with a child's parents/guardians and the child's teachers. The School Assessment Team (SAT) determines where the child's class placement is. It is done in the least restrictive environment for the student being the SWD. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. A variety of intervention programs are available for all ELLs in math, ELA and content area classes. All programs are delivered in English. There are several after-school intervention programs to assist students in ELA and math. ELL students are afforded access to all of the programs. The school also offers an after school academy to all students. The ELLs with IEPs attend SETTS classes. The school has purchased two computer based reading intervention program Read 180 and BrainPOP ELL, designed to raise students' reading levels. Social Studies and science teachers have incorporated literacy skills into their lessons in order to assist the ENL and language arts teachers in improving students' literacy and writing abilities. The computer based programs offer support in several languages. Math teachers can assign their students skill specific work in their native languages. In addition, our ELLs have an access to bilingual dictionaries, math, social studies, and science glossaries, and science and social studies textbooks in the students' native languages. Moreover, ELA, math, and other core content areas teachers, offer a small group instruction to our ELLs, where they differentiate instruction and reinforce any specific skill that the students struggle with. ELL students are also paired with native speakers of English or successful English language learners who have mastered the language. Our ENL teachers attend the team meetings, where the teachers discuss, review students' work, and compare the results from any given assessments. During these meetings, the ENL teachers also offer strategies and help to create modified assignments and assessments for our ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school purchased BrainPop ELLs. It is a web-based English learning language program designed specifically for English Language Learners. This program comprises of short, animated movies as well as games, quizzes, and interactive features. It 2018-19 CEP 62  ecompasses the four main language skills: listening, reading, speaking, and writing. The school anticipates that the program will enhance student performance on the NYS ELA exam. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. There are several after-school programs to assist students in ELA and math. ELL students are afforded access to all of the programs. The school also offers an after school academy, Achieve Now, UAU program, Green Team, Dance Team, Science program and basketball and wrestling practice open to all the students. Parents are invited to these programs via school notices, Pupil Path, and the One Call Now phone system. Whenever possible, notices are sent to the parents in their native languages. 100% of the ELLs have been invited to participate in all after school programs and at least one-third of them participate. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL teachers received a network of desktop computers for the ELLs to use technology as a means of intervention. The students use programs such as Read 180 and BrainPOP ELLs to improve language skills. The teachers scaffold the material in order to service the students’ needs. Additionally, every classroom has an interactive white board or Promethean boards. The use of technology has a huge impact on the instruction of ELLs. Teachers are able to provide a myriad of visual and auditory support for the students. Other uses of technology include BrainPop ELL, Ed Performance, Read 180, and access to state of the art computer labs. In addition, our school uses SMART Board and/or Promethean Board to make lessons visual and interactive as much as possible. Teachers have access to bilingual dictionaries, content glossaries, and library books in the students' native languages. In social studies, textbooks are available in some native languages. In addition, students can benefit from translations offered by other classmates and teachers who are fluent in other languages. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? I.S. 72 provides ELLs with as much native language support as possible. When possible, teachers are provided with dual-language libraries and bilingual dictionaries. The students receive content specific bilingual glossaries to be used in class and/or on exams when they are available in their native language. Students also receive translated versions of state exams (if they are available in their native languages). There is also school staff available to assist the students in their native language. Social studies textbooks have translated versions to some languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and resources are both age and grade level appropriate. All intervention materials purchased are specifically for intermediate school students and they are leveled within that range. For students who are unable to read at grade level (ELL-SWDs), we provide them with just-right books or a variety of articles that are more closely aligned to students' reading levels to support content knowledge and reading skills. We look closely at each child's IEP to ensure that they receive all services, modifications, and accommodations mandated on their IEPs. . 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When a student is identified as an ELL, he or she immediately meets with the ENL teachers and guidance counselor. They are paired with a classmate, given a tour of the school, and meet their teachers. Their parents are invited in for a parent conference and meet the parent coordinator. All our ELLs are offered access to an after school academy which runs on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 1:30 to 3:00. All instruction is in English, with the implementation of Native Language 2018-19 CEP 63  support, when possible. Based on the students' level, the program we use in after school academy is the "BrainPOP ELL" which provides materials that promote the development of academic language through content area instruction and explicit instruction, in which the teachers identify a specific strategy for students, then model exactly where, how, and why to apply the strategy to get meaning from a reading passage. For the second half of the year, we focus on science. Students perform experiments and discuss procedures and results, using speaking skills. Our school assists newly enrolled ELL students by providing them and their families with welcome kits in their home languages, bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, and lists of useful websites, such as our school website, Google Translate and BrainPOP ELL. Most of the time, newly admit ELL students are buddied with another student to help him/her navigate the schools and offer support in class. Students who enter from elementary schools, are offered the school tours upon request by our parent coordinator. All new 6 th graders are offered a welcome assembly by our principal, Mrs. Jessica Jackson. There are also additional assemblies throughout the school year for all the 6 th graders. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The school currently offers Spanish and Italian. While most students attend ENL classes during the foreign language period, many of our advanced students enjoy attending the classes and learn a third language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our school does not currently offer any Dual Language Programs. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teachers will continue to attend ELL professional development opportunities throughout the school year offered by the Office of English Language Learners. The ENL teachers will turn-key the valuable materials from the professional development sessions to the staff, (including assistant principals, all content area teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapists, secretaries, and parent coordinators) in monthly meetings after school sessions (the last Friday of every month from September to May,) as well as during professional development days on Mondays. These PD sessions are aligned to the goals and the needs of the school. Topics to be covered during these sessions include: 1. Identification and Placement of ELLs (September 25) 2. Understanding Second Language Acquisition (November 27) 3. ESL strategies and techniques for classroom teachers (January 29) 4. Assessment strategies for ELLs (March 26) 5. Overview of the NYSESLAT exam (April 30) The purpose of these workshops will be to enhance and support ELL instruction in order to improve teaching and learning across all content areas and delivering the Common Core-aligned instruction. Teachers will be presented with practical strategies that are helpful in accelerating academic achievement of ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 64  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development will be provided by our ENL teachers during professional development days on Mondays, as well as during monthly meetings after school sessions (the last Friday of every month from September to May) as part of mandated 15% of total hours for all teachers. All attendance records will be kept with the assistant principals. In addition, teachers will have other opportunities to attend the training sessions provided by the UFT and/or the Department of Education. Topics to be covered during these sessions include: 1. Identification and Placement of ELLs (September 25) 2. Understanding Second Language Acquisition (November 27) 3. ESL strategies and techniques for classroom teachers (January 29) 4. Assessment strategies for ELLs (March 26) 5. Overview of the NYSESLAT exam (April 30) Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teachers will invite the parents or guardians of ELLs for an individual meeting at least once a year to discuss the child's progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Parents will be invited by telephone to meet with the ENL teachers at a time that is most convenient for them. If necessary, a translator will be available for those parents who request such service. The school has several bilingual teachers and paraprofessionals who are available to translate in languages such as Spanish, Italian, Arabic, French, Polish, Russian, Albanian, and Hebrew. Also, translation services will be available through the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit in case a language that a parent/guardian speaks is not available for translation in our school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. As a community-minded and family oriented school, parents of our ELL students are considered an integral part of our educational community. Throughout the school year, they are encouraged to attend informational sessions, parent-teacher conferences, class trips, and special events. Our school offers monthly PA meetings to all parents. Additionally, parents will be invited to monthly meetings (third Monday of the month) with the ENL teachers to discuss a variety of topics that will help raise student achievement including information on the Common Core State Standards, NYS exams as well as ESL curriculum. The school has several bilingual teachers and paraprofessionals who are available to translate in languages such as Spanish, Italian, French, Polish, Russian, Albanian, Hebrew, and Arabic. Additionally, each parent will be invited for an individual meeting with the ENL teachers at least once a year to discuss the child's progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. The parents will be invited by telephone to meet with the ENL teacher at a time that is most convenient for them. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jessica Jackson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.O. Rocco Laurie Intermediate School DBN: 31R072 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) J. Jackson M. Curran A. Brzezinski V. Careccia Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent E. McLoughlin Teacher/Subject Area C. Manzo T. Aiello A. Rizzo Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach M. Karasinski School Counselor A. Lodico N. Kraft L Rosen L. Villatoro Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other ENL Teacher Other ENL Teacher Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 10/11/2018 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R072 School Name: The Police Officer Rocco Laurie Sch Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Toni Rufo Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. According to the Home Language Identification Survey, ATS reports, Student Emergency Contact cards, and any surveys conducted by our school of the past few years, we have families whose native languages are the following: Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, Chinese, Albanian, Italian, Sinhalese, Malayalam, Ukrainian, Turkish, Polish, Korean, Hebrew, Tagalog, Portuguese, Vietnamese, Tamil, and Russian. When meeting our community needs, letters will be translated; school representatives who speak these languages will be present at PA meetings. Monies will also be spent when translations are conducted during parent meetings at school. All letters of information will be sent home as soon as they are translated in house or by the Department of Education's Translation Unit. This will be as timely as possible. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 69  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Albanian Cantonese Chinese Hebrew Italian Khmer English Albanian Cantonese Chinese Hebrew Italian Khmer Korean Korean Malayalam Malayalam Mandarin Mandarin Mossi Tagalog Polish Mossi Tagalog Polish Portuguese Portuguese Russian Arabic Russian Arabic Sinhalese Sinhalese Spanish Tamil Turkish Urdu Spanish Tamil Turkish Urdu Ukrainian Ukrainian Vietnamese Vietnamese 75% 1.22% 0% 7.64% 0.1% 0.41% 0.1% 0.61% 0.05% 0% 0% 0.1% 0.2% 0.2% 0.56% 2.55% 0.15% 9.78% 0.05% 0.05% 0.97% 0.15% 0.1% English Albanian Cantonese Chinese Hebrew Italian Khmer Korean Mandarin Malayalam Mossi Tagalog Polish Portuguese Russian Arabic Sinhalese Spanish Tamil Turkish Urdu Ukrainian Vietnamese 74.75% 1.17% 0.25% 5.8% 0.1% 0.41% 0.1% 0.66% 0.05% 1.63% 0.05% 0.1% 0.2% 0.2% 0.56% 2.65% 0.2% 9.78% 0.05% 0.05% 0.97% 0.15% 0.1% 2018-19 CEP 70  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families School lunch forms/annual income At the beginning of the school year Pupil Path invitations Throughout the year immunization forms At the beginning of the school year, updated as needed throughout the year High school information In the Fall How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. A number of documents appear on our school website, http:www.is72/org, where parents can change them to their to their preferred language. We offer translations of these documents in almost 80 languages. The documents are updated as needed. In the fall, we also provide annual income verification, (school lunch form), in the parent's preferred language. Throughout the year, documents are distributed to parents as needed, in their preferred language. We are provided with translated versions of these documents These forms are already translated by the Department of Education's Translation Unit. They are already translated to many languages by the Department of Educations' Translation Unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 71  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curiculum night September 20 Parent Teacher Conferences November 27, March and May 16 Meetings with ENL teachers Tuesdays throughout the year interpretation service(s)? Throughout the school year parents are given many opportunities to meet with the teachers/administrators to discuss the child's progress, On September 20 we will host an evening conference, Curriculum Night, with the purpose of allowing parents and guardians to meet with classroom teachers and the administration to learn about grade level curriculum and expectations for the school year. All of the meetings, conferences, informal interactions with the parents , will be conducted with a qualified interpreter in the parent's preferred language. in addition, there are three parent teacher conferences, held in November, March and May, for the parents to attend and discuss their child's progress at school, as well, as to help strengthen relationships with individual families. All meetings, conferences and informal interactions will be conducted with a qualified interpreter in the parent's preferred language as needed. In addition, parents will individually meet with the ENL teachers on Tuesday afternoons, to discuss the goals of the program, their child's language development progress, and English language proficiency assessment results, and the language needs in al content areas. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, families are contacted in their native languages. Messages are sent in a messenger program, where translation services are utilized for limited English proficient families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 CEP 72  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All the staff members receive and have access to Chancellor's Regulations at the beginning of the school year. We also offer training during the first week of school. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) I.S. 72 ensures that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child's education. There will be reports at the September and October PA meetings, as well as in letters home. Parents of newly enrolled ELLs will be shown the Parent Orientation Video during a parent orientation, which is available in 13 languages . Monthly informational meetings will be held throughout the year. A large multilingual Welcome Poster informing the parents that the translation services are available is posted in the hallway as soon as the parents enter the building. Language ID Guide is placed at security desk and the main office. In addition, parents receive a copy of the Parents' Bill of Rights in their native language. Additionally, all materials sent home will have translated copies in the parents' preferred language. A lot of documents appear on our school website (http://www.is72.org/) where parents can click and change them to their language of preference. We offer translations of these documents to about 80 languages. They are constantly updated as needed. We are also provided with some of the translated versions of many documents, such as school lunch form or annual income, among the others, which are distributed to the parents in the language of their preference. All the documents and forms are distributed to the parents as needed. Pupil Path also offers translated messages to the parents in their preferred language. All parents have a right to refer to the Board of Education website to review the information on translation and interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We survey the parents via the school website, where they can take surveys in the language of their preference. In addition, parents' concerns are welcomed through emails and face-to-face meetings. 2018-19 CEP 73 
