2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R445 School Name: PORT RICHMOND HIGH SCHOOL Principal: ANDREW GREENFIELD 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Port Richmond High School 31R445 353100011445 9-12 School Number (DBN): 85 St. Joseph’s Avenue, Staten Island, NY 10302 718-420-2100 718-981-6203 Phone Number: Andrew Greenfield Fax: Email Address: AGreenf@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Andrew Greenfield Donna Ryan Larissa Maiorana Suzanne Woodman Elizabeth Rodriguez Michael Roldan Angelina Vega Michael Candella District Information Geographical District: 31 VincenzaGallassio Superintendent: Petrides Complex, Bldg. A, Rm 231, 715 Ocean Terrace, S.I., NY 10301 Superintendent’s Office Address: VGallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Staten Island District 31 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Kevin Moran Executive Director: Petrides Complex, 715 Ocean Terrace, SI NY 10301 kmoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-374-4254 Phone Number: 212-374-5585 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Andrew Greenfield Donna Ryan Larissa Maiorana Joseph Marra Elizabeth Rodriguez Angelina Vega Michael Roldan Mike Candella Suzanne Woodman Joann Nellis *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ CSA Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nancy Ficken Theresa Flood Susan Horgan Edward Jerlin Steven Leslierandal GinaMarieSantiago Christine Roos Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Port Richmond High School is a diverse school community of approximately 1600 students who hail from all across Staten Island. We celebrate our diversity and take pride in our Raider Spirit which unifies us in our journey to success. We are a Title I school with more than 70% of our students qualifying for free/reduced lunch. Our school is organized into academies which allows us to provide all students with personalized interest based learning experiences. Our ninth graders begin their high school experience as members of our Freshmen Academy. The Freshmen Academy organization supports students in transitioning to high school through activities and a curriculum which supports their growth and academic success. Beginning in tenth grade, students transition to our other academies which are: Gateway Honors Academy, Collegiate Honors Academy, Med Tech Academy, Culinary Arts Academy, Institute for Business, Hospitality, Entrepreneurship & Technology (IBHET), The TV & Performing & Media Arts Academy and our new STEAM program. These academies are linked to outside agencies, colleges and organizations connected to the specific area of interest for each academy. The mission of Port Richmond High School is to provide all of our students with individualized challenges, opportunities, and resources that will help them become lifelong learners and productive, responsible citizens. This mission is accomplished through this "academy structure" and complimented through the academic, family and social supports provided by the community school structure. The 2018-19 school year brings us to the fourth year of our journey as a Community School. We are excited about our status as a Community School and we are enthusiastic about expanding our partnerships with our community agencies and local leaders on behalf of our students and their families. Our state-of-the-art Student Wellness Center is open and functioning daily to meet the physical health needs as well as the mental health needs of our students. Our Community School Director and our Parent Coordinator will be organizing activities opening the school to parents for a broad spectrum of activities (yoga, life skills class, college financial aid sessions, spin classes, job skill classes, GED, ESL, Medical Billing, etc.) designed to engage parents and family members in the daily life of the school. The Director is also beginning the work of partnering with community organizations to bring job training opportunities to our school to support our parents in developing job skills. During the 2015-16 school year the school opened a food pantry to support the school’s families in meeting the nutritional needs of our students. The goal for the 2018-19 school year is to expand the number of families supported by our food pantry each month. Our students obviously benefit the most from our community school status as we will increase the number of staff members who are working closely with students to improve daily attendance and student achievement. Additional funding in support of Community Schools will result in extended learning time opportunities for students, smaller class sizes and expanded mental health services. As the community school work continues to expand in the 2018-19 school year, we will provide additional opportunities for students to benefit from extended day learning sessions for graduation credit, tutoring for ongoing student achievement, SAT prep sessions and Regents prep sessions in anticipation of Regents exams. Recent data from surveys suggests that we are doing well with regard to establishing a positive tone within the building and in establishing strong relationships with our families. We use the dedicated mental health funding for community schools to provide social workers who can go to our students' homes and work with families at their homes. Our goal is to improve the home-school bond by connecting at the home and supporting our families there. This builds the trust between school and home. One of the educational challenges facing our students is the weakness of commitment to fulfilling the goal of attaining a high school diploma. Our most at-risk students often lose hope of academic success early in their high school career and one of the priorities of the Community School Director will be the monitoring of at risk students in the 9 th and 10 th grade. Each ninth grade student will be assigned a mentor from a community based organization to ensure that all ninth graders are monitored throughout the school-year. Providing emotional and academic supports to our students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  in the first two years of high school will be the priority for our mental health and attendance improvement program. The mentoring program established for the 2015-16 school year proved to have a positive impact on Ninth Grade attendance. As a result, we have decided to expand the mentoring program to impact a large number of at-risk tenth, eleventh and twelfth graders. Several mentors will "move up" with approximately 280 at-risk tenth, eleventh, and twelfth graders and continue to support them in their efforts to achieve a high school diploma.. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. A pilot program of thirty ninth grade students participated in the AVID program during the 2015-16 school year. The students benefited from this program and the teachers noted a dramatic improvement in student academic skills as well as college readiness skills. This program serves to create a college-going culture that increases the number of students who enroll and succeed in higher education and their lives beyond. The AVID program expanded to support 136 ninth grade students during the 2016-17 school year. Additional staff members were trained in the program and collaborated throughout the school year on a number of initiatives aligned to this pilot program. This program is supported by a grant from the Staten Island Foundation. This program is very collaborative in nature. This year the program continues with a smaller group of students as the ONEGOAL class focused on College Readiness and College Access For All. The declining enrollment of the school during past years continues to challenge the school community as the staff and students work tirelessly to build the school’s reputation in a number of ways. The weekly student-produced television show Good Morning Port Richmond serves to highlight the spirit and success of the school to the broader community, especially to parents and students. The school has made strong inroads to elected officials by inviting them to the school to meet with students and to share with them the successes and challenges of our school family. Our students work as interns in government offices, cover media events with our television crews and host meals for elected officials. Our work as a community school is strengthening our role in the community and providing opportunities for members of our community to see first-hand the extraordinary things happening here each day. Our JROTC program partners with a local elementary school to provide our students with the opportunity to share the spirit of our school. This program not only attracts new students but also serves as a strong service learning component of our JROTC program. The school administration has worked with the Office of School Enrollment to ensure that students interested in our Honors Programs have access to becoming a student in our school. Developing strong honors programs to attract students is a priority. The reinstatement of our Collegiate Honors Program (Humanities) has begun with two strong classes of ninth graders who are using technology in their daily lessons and who are participating in activities aligned to the humanities. The Borough center for Enrollment will be housed at the school during peak enrollment sessions in August and September. The school is also initiating a Dual Language Program (Spanish) for the 2016-17 school year which will serve Staten Island students who have been in dual language programs since first grade. The entering class of 2020 has approximately eighty more students than 2019 cohort. Our partnership with primary feeder school IS 51 will expand with the addition of the Raider Center in that school to promote high school and college success awareness with 6th-8th grade students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  On the instructional side, we are making progress in the expansion of the use of instructional technology in our classrooms. During the 2015-16 school-year we completed the installation of smart-boards in every classroom and expanded the use of IPads for instruction. As part of our IPad pilot program over two hundred students in our Freshmen Academy were provided with IPads to be used for note taking and instruction throughout the school day. The 2016-17 school-year marked our third year in this pilot program. We also expanded the IPad program in Fall, 2017 school year to support ELL students. We have several blended classroom models initiated this year in order to deepen our understanding of how to use technology to motivate and deepen learning. Our IZone online learning program continues to provide students with the opportunity to take online courses and experience the exciting world of web-based learning. We will also address rigorous instruction by focusing on the District's work on the Core Collaborative and by providing teachers with time to come to a deeper understanding of their content standards. Our instructional focus will be: If teachers strategically plan to provide opportunities for student discourse and productive struggle driven by clear learning intentions and guided by success criteria and the formative assessment cycle, then students will engage in rigorous peer discussions, demonstrate deeper understanding of content and own their learning as evidenced by an increase in student achievement. Teachers will use daily department based common planning sessions to collaborate on lesson planning and lesson study to drive this work. Increasing student discourse in lessons and providing teachers with a tool-belt of assessment strategies will be a focus of our work in improving instruction. In our 9th and 10th grade classrooms we are expanding our work with the Hochman Writing Program. Our primary feeder school (IS 51) is using the Hochman based Writing Revolution Program to develop the writing skills of all of their students. Therefore it makes sense to continue this work at the secondary level. Our teachers are using the Hochman program to build our students’ writing skills and support them in their writing across content areas. All ELA teachers are working to incorporate a writing piece into each class period (Hochman, guided questions, response paragraphs, graphic organizers, etc.) to ensure that writing is an integral part of each daily lesson. Ninth graders and ELL students are working with software from Achieve 3000 in order to support the development of reading skills. All level 1 and 2 ninth graders have a double period in math. Teachers use the A;gebra for All curriculum. Our ninth grade students will continue to have a 9 period day and for 2018-19. Many of our tenth grade students will also have a 9 period day. Sophomores will take an extra class based on their academy. Throughout the school year, our professional development plan focuses on deepening the work of content specific teacher teams, deepening our work with the Core Collaborative program, and increasing the number of teachers trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS). Teacher collaboration during Circular 6 assignments will be a focus for our work as a staff as well as our work with students. Teachers will be involved in inquiry activities, lesson study and of course co-planning of lessons. Another focus of teacher collaboration will provide additional opportunities for teachers to collaborate on looking at student work and also on developing lesson plans and unit plans that best address student learning needs for students of all academic levels. We are especially proud of our partnership with Wagner College and there has been tremendous expansion of our partnership in the past year. In June, 2018 four graduates received full tuition, room and board scholarships to Wagner College. Wagner College has two offices staffed within our school. One is used by a professor from their Education Department who works with new teachers here as an instructional coach. The other office houses the Port Richmond Partnership Leadership Academy (PRPLA) staff. The 2018-19 school-year will showcase a Wagner College staff which includes a full time director, three Bonner student leaders as mentors, a Vista Intern for mentoring and college presentations, an Education Professor as a staff developer and instructional coach, a Foreign Language 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Professor who will work with our English Language Learners and three other staff members who will coordinate the College Access components by working one day per week at the high school. We are also opening a Raider Center at our main feeder school, IS 51. This office will be staffed by a Wagner College staff member and will serve the intermediate school students in their transition to high school as well as expand their understanding of college readiness. The Raider Center office at Port Richmond High School provides our students with a visual reminder of our relationship with colleges. Through Wagner College we have instituted a leadership program (PRPLA) allowing 40 students each from 10 th ,11 th and 12 th grade to live on the Wagner campus, take high school or college credit classes and participate in service learning projects within the community. This program is designed for first generation college students who otherwise may not be a strong candidate for post-secondary studies. The end result is a full college scholarship (room and board) for a minimum of four graduates each year. In the coming year we are working to expand the partnership to other colleges associated with CUMU (Coalition of Urban and Metropolitan Universities) and provide all Leadership Academy students with full college scholarships by the time they graduate. In addition, four of our chemistry students participate each summer in a research internship pairing a Raider student with a college student on a project involving chemistry research. Students in both these programs receive a stipend for their work as well as the opportunity to live on campus during the summer. Wagner College is also partnered with Port Richmond High School through the Staten Island 30,000 Degrees Initiative. This initiative works to partner local colleges and high schools with the goal being a significant increase in the number of bachelor degrees awarded to Staten Islanders. In addition to our strong partnership with Wagner College, our Liberty Partnership Program with the College of Staten Island continues to grow with this school year proving to be our largest. Through Liberty Partnership, college students join our Raider family and serve as tutors to our students. Through the CSI BMI program, college students serve as mentors for our Raiders and work directly in our math classrooms to support students in math achievement. Through our partnership with Roundabout Theatre, the world of literature and drama is coming alive for our students through the stage and our students now have access to Broadway productions. Our emphasis on Arts Education is also seen through the work of our Music department and our Culinary Arts Department which are major components of our community outreach program. Our music program consists of a jazz band, guitar ensemble, string ensemble, symphonic band, marching band and chorus. Throughout the year our musicians perform in concerts, parades, holiday tree lighting ceremonies and assorted civic engagements. In like manner, our culinary artists are serving our community regularly through cooking competitions, healthy cooking demos, hosting meals for community events, providing meals for the needy and conducting culinary fundraisers for community charities. Our Junior Achievement program provides our students with opportunities to mentor young children while also participating in this highly successful service learning program. We have also expanded community service by having 90 students participate in the Read Alliance program which had our students teach reading to local first graders from 4 neighborhood schools . The 2018-19 school year will see our school continue the Exploring the Arts program. This program is funded by the Tony and Susan Bennett Foundation and allows us to partner with Carnegie Hall and the Julliard School. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Data Trend: Attendance of Chronically absent students in 2017-18: To address this trend the Principal, AP PPS and CSD will meet biweekly with individual staff (AP, Counselor, Aide, Mentors, SWs, Deans, etc) to case manage the chronically absent students and develop plans to maintain or improve their daily attendance. Mentors are assigned to chronically absent tenth-twelfth graders. Mentors are assigned to all ninth graders. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Data Trend: ELA Regents Passing Rate 62% The ELA curriculum has been changed to the HMH Connections curriculum for all 4 years. The students are using a single writing rubric for all ELA assignments. The teachers are teaching the use of the 5 Steps of Reading annotation protocol for all ELA classes. All ELA teachers are receiving training in Hochman Writing Program and implementing the writing program within the Connections curriculum. Portfolios will be used by ELA teachers to track performace tasks to determine the level of growth/progress. 68 Tenth grade students receive an extra writing course to build writing skills for the June, 2017 regents. 130 ninth grade students are enrolled in AVID to build organizational study skills and to use Cornell note taking procedures. Data Trend: Algebra Regents Passing Rate: 50%, An identified area of weakness for students was Standard for Mathematical Practice 1: Making sense of problems and perseverance and Standard for Mathematical Practice 3: Construct viable arguments and critique the reasoning of others. Two algebra teacher impact teams will be developed. The first focused on lesson lesson study and the second focus in inquiry work. Two additional inquiry teams will be created in geometry and algebra 2 will be created to support student achievement moving forward. Five mathematics teachers will engage in teacher lead coaching cycles grounded in the Danielson framework to improve lesson development, increase rigor, and increase student engagement. An additional two to four mathematics teachers will be added to the coaching cycles beginning in February 2019. Students will be engaging in regents Roundup activities to support skill building in mathematics and numeracy. Students will engage in the use of the SOLVE protocol as a metacognitive strategy to address Standards for Mathematical Practice 1: Making sense of problems and persevere in solving them. Teachers will engage students in planned productive struggle activities to address Standards for Mathematical Practice 3: Construct viable arguements and critique the reasoning of others. Data Trend: Global History Passing rate: 57%, US History Passing Rate: 57% All 9th & 10th grade teachers will utilize resources from Passports in conjunction with New Visions to plan and execute rigorous lessons. Continued use of Hochman writing strategies in all classes. The AP will meet biweekly with H7P teachers to identify skills and lesson activities that need to be developed for student success on the Global regents exam. Data Trend: Regents Passing Rate Living Environment: 53%, Earth Science 22%. Inquiry protocols will drive shifts in instructional foci in all science courses. Specific data tied to Common Core and Science Core Curriculum skills will be obtained through baseline and formative assessments throughout the year. Resulting instructional shifts will target areas of need and students will be re-assessed after implementation of shifts. In addition, the department will identify evidence of rigorous instruction and said evidence will be addressed during learning walks, formal and informal observations and professional development. Tutoring and the Regents Exam practice program, Castle Learning, will be used to support students in preparing for in class assessments and the Regents Exam in June. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  ENL students will receive algebra class in Spanish and in English. Title III funding will be used for extended learning and social supports. ENL students who have not passed the ELA Regents will have a dedicated integrated ELA class to build skills for success on the Regents. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The 2018-19 school year will be an exciting time for Port Richmond High School. A number of new innovations, partnerships and programs will result in a stronger school with strong ties to our community and to student success. In addition, last year our school saw an increase in our graduation rate of over 4%. Last year also saw the start of true data inquiry for the first time across all grade levels and content areas. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R445 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1549 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 304 294 4 42 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 12 16 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 68.3% % Reduced Lunch 7.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 44.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 24.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.25 1% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 76% 63% 66.2% 8.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black, Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A NO YES YES No N/A 332 272 5 17 84.9% 3.9% 26.3% 22.8% 7.4% 1.8% 20 15% 7.2 N/A N/A 79% 69% 72.4% 19% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A NO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Economically Disadvantaged NO ALL STUDENTS NO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X x X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS: ● Strong content knowledge ● Strong understanding of Regents Curriculum ● Cohesive ICT teacher pairings ● Daily Subject Content planning time ● Weekly department professional development Strong school spirit and positive school tone Strong math and ELA Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  NEEDS: Develop systems to bring consistency to instruction and curriculum within and across content areas Improve formative assessment practices across content areas and to improve the expertise of staff in using assessment data to improve and adapt instruction More effective pre-planning and use of student to student discourse in lessons to engage students in ambitious intellectual activity each day Work with teaching staff to more closely align our lesson objectives to assessment activities Student/Family mental health issues need to be addressed in order to build trust and strengthen ties between school and family Regents results in Math, ELA, Social Studies and Science need to improve Data Trends: Regents Passing rates for June, 2018 Exams: ELA: 62% US History: 57% Global History: 57% Algebra: 50% Living Environment: 53% Earth Science: 22% School Quality Review report indicated the need to improve content area curriculum and consistency of curriculum and curriculum sequence across classrooms Student survey in Spring, 2018 indicated 49% of students found daily lessons engaging. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Advance data on supervisory observations indicated that teachers are not consistently utilizing student discussions (Component 3b) during daily lessons and that professional development on student-to-student discourse is needed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year, teachers will develop curricula and instructional strategies to meet the needs of all learners in the four core content areas. This will be evidenced by the following Regents Passing Rates for June, 2019: ELA: 72% Common Core Algebra: 75% Living Environment: 65% Earth Science: 60% Global Studies: 65% US History 72% 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A year-long pacing calendar with unit titles, as well as their start and end dates, and dates of subject specific benchmark exams (performance tasks) will be created by teacher teams and submitted by September 15, 2018 to department heads via Google drive. In order to provide rigorous instruction, teacher teams will focus on designing coherent instruction (1e) to improve student outcomes. All teachers Supervisors, September 2018 - June, 2019 All Supervisors, All teachers Core subject teachers ELA, Science, Math, Social Studies supervisors and All students September 2018-June, 2019 teachers Faculty Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Supervisors Sept 2018 - June 2019 Improving Curriculum Units: In order to support rigorous instruction, teacher teams will focus on questioning (3b) to improve student outcomes by targeting needs identified according to student outcome data, building on the work we have already started. Each specific subject area within a department will create at least one unit map for each unit. The first draft of the unit is to be submitted to the department head, via Google drive, at the end of the first week of each month (before implementation of the unit). The first unit outline will be due September 22, as school starts on September eighth. Each department will also identify one to two skills that will be areas of focus for the department that are aligned to common core standards and Regents examinations. Requirements for each unit: In teacher teams, the subject area teachers will refine the unit outline. Each unit outline is to include a pre-assessment activity, a summative assessment, as well as at 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  least one formative assessment that incorporate the skills necessary to complete the summative assessment. Adjustments: A special education teacher and/or ENL teacher will lead at least one teacher team meeting per month to support adjustment of the unit with special considerations for students with disabilities and English language learners in mind. The revised units, with adjustments highlighted, will be posted on each department’s google drive (As a resource, teacher teams may use the Specific Considerations documents created by the Office of Teacher Effectiveness). Teachers will place a focus on conceptual questioning in lesson planning and delivery. Also, All teachers teachers will analyze classroom exams and performance tasks as a means to identify common misunderstandings and misconceptions to be addressed the following instructional periods. Teachers have been trained in Hochman/The writing revolution and AVID strategies and are implementing them in humanities classes. A tutoring center manned by CBO staff and college students will be organized to support students during lunch periods and after school. All students All students Course/grade level teams will meet regularly to: September 2018-June, 2019 All teachers and supervisors ELA and SS teachers September 2018-June, 2019 Principal, CSD, Wagner Coll. Supervisors ● Co-planning Lessons Develop lesson calendars ● Develop lesson activities All teachers September 2018-June, 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  ● Develop uniform unit exams ● Look at student work created through performance tasks/formative assessments and make instructional decisions Parents will be invited to school to meet all teachers in September to receive curriculum information, grading policies and instructional foci for the upcoming school year. Parents receive newsletters/remind text messages and weekly phone messages from the principal outlining the academic supports and academic programs available to all students. Parents September 2018-June, 2019 Parents Sept. 2018 All Supervisors, teachers Principal Parent Coordinator CSD Teachers APs Principal CSD PC ISS students are programmed for the least restrictive environment and ICT classes are programmed as necessary to provide a larger percentage of ISS students with the opportunity to participate in Regents ending classes. ISS students Absent students At the start of each ICT lesson, one teacher will sequester students who were absent the day before in order to conduct a small group AP ISS ICT Teachers APs Supervision All year September 2018-June, 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24 CSD, Aps, APs Supervision CSD, APs Supervision AP ISS, APs Supervision ESL Coordinator, Wagner Director, ELL Staff AP ELA ELA Staff9th grade Writing CoachAP ELAELA StaffAP ELAELA staffAP Math/ Math TeachersMath Teachers, APMath Teachers, APSchool LeadersAPs SupervisionAP ISSPrincipal, LeadersAP MathAP ELA "catch-up" exercise and return the student(s) to the whole class lesson ASAP. Regents tutoring opportunities will be provided in the weeks prior to each Regents exam administration All students Initial Planning Conferences held in September will highlight teacher passing rates, Regents passing rates and set goals for professional progress. All teachers and supervisors December 2018 , January 2019 May, June 2019 Saturday Regents intervention classes will target 2019 Cohort students, with a focus on skills deficiencies as identified through assessment. AIS services via pull-out sessions will be provided for at-risk students, including but not limited to, 2019 cohort students who are not programmed for a Regents ending class, students with IEPs and ELLs, during the two months preceding each administration of the Regents exams. ELA: Teachers will implement portions of the HMH collections curriculum as well as other literary and informational text chosen by teacher teams. Each collection will use one to two anchor texts to teach themes/skills within a unit . After each each text is studied a formative assessment task will be performed by students. Each collection will end with a uniform performance task. Portfolios will be utilized to track performance tasks using a common rubric to show growth/progress. 2019 Cohort Students September 2018 At-Risk students ELL students All students September 2018-June, 2019 September 2018-June, 2019 September 2018-June, 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  ELLs will be placed in integrated classes for all content areas. All ELA students will develop the skill of reading annotation through the use and practice of the 5 Steps of Reading Protocol In all ELA lessons, teachers will use an anchor text to focus on one of three focus standards: ELLs RI 2 - Central Idea RI 5 - Author's ideas are developed RI 6 - Author's purpose Mathematics: Teachers will engage students in Regents ending math classes will engage in Regents Roundup activities including multiple choice and constructive response questions to teach academic vocabulary and to teach analysis skills necessary for deeper understanding aligned to the math shifts. All students All students September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Teachers will engage students in the use of the SOLVE protocol as a metacognitive strategy to address SMP1. Teachers will engage students in planned productive struggle activities to address SMP3. The Algebra 1 IMPACT team will engage in continuous lesson study cycles to improve student outcomes. Coaching: Core Collaborative Associates will work with impact teams across all departments. Pearson Prentice Hall will conduct SIOP training to a select group of teachers across all content areas with a focus of supporting ELL students. Dissemination grant (provided by Lavalle prep school) provides continued teacher coaching opportunities grounded in the Danielson framework. 9th Graders Math Students All faculty September 2018-June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  All Math teachers Selected teachers and administrators Selected staff Fall, 2018 September 2018- June, 2019 Summer 2018- June 2019 Fall 2018-Spring 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Weekly Phone Blasts, Parent assemblies during parent teacher conferences and monthly SLT and PTA Meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday Professional Development time Funding for AVID from Staten Island Foundation Common Planning Time Meetings Focus School Funding Wagner College Staff and students Community school Staff Community School Funding CBO Support Liberty Partnership Funding UAU Funding Supervisors Student Health Center Staff Counselors Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019 75% of students will attain a passing grade for all classes ending in a Regents course in June, 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship Reports,Final Exams, Midterm exams, Mock Regents Each teacher will receive three observations and reports by february 1, 2018. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  After each marking period the principal and the Superintendent's representative will meet with Content Assistant Principals to review department scholarship, individual teacher course passing scholarship, teacher attendance, SLC student attendance and Regents scholarship data when applicable. Student work from assessments and summative assessments will also be reviewed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? STRENGTHS: ● Great students ● Caring and dedicated staff On the student survey, the students gave positive ratings to teachers in all five categories. The ratings of our staff surpassed both Staten Island High School teachers as well as the city-wide average.  There was a 10% decrease in overall incidents for the school year as compared to the year prior. ● Community school designation 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  ● Wagner College Partnership ● Evening Guidance/Detention program with parents ● Community based organizations ● Support of elected officials 9th Grade Mentoring Program has 92% attendance  School survey indicates constituents have a positive view of the school NEEDS: ● Data trends:  Over 400 students are chronically absent  Ninth grade students with mentors in 2017-18 had an average daily attendance of 92% In the student survey administered in Spring, 2017 only 49% of students gave favorable ratings to teachers for lesson engagement. In the same survey only 66% of students found Teacher-Student relations positive.  Additional resources needed for ENL students and families as indicated by the low performance index for ENL seniors (less than 50 in both Math and ELA)  Mentors needed to establish stronger connection to 9th and 10th grade students  OORS data indicates that majority of altercations occur in classrooms or in locations that have school staff present. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, through the use of Restorative Practices, reported incidents for level 3 or higher will be reduced by 10%, from 206 incidents to 185 incidents or less, as measured by OORS reports. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Two nights each week school support staff will be available to meet with parents and students regarding academic growth as well as matters pertaining to social/emotional development All students Community School Director will develop and implement a mentoring plan that will result in each ninth grade student and 287 chronically absent tenth, eleventh and twelfth grade students being assigned a mentor for the 2018-19 school year. All ninth grade and targeted 10th, 1th, & 12th grade students September 2018-June, 2019 September 2018-June, 2019 Twenty five teachers will be selected to receive TCIS training for teachers (2 day in-house model) Teachers Safety Coordinator September 2018-June, 2019 Students who are recidivists in attaining more than two suspensions for the year will be targeted by the Safety Coordinator for specific and mandated services which include: Students with multiple suspensions September 2018-June, 2019 Daily Reports Weekly parent contact Follow-up parent meeting in two weeks weekly counseling Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) CSD, AP Guidance CSD, Mentors Safety Coordinator Safety Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Deans and Counselors will make presentations to all ninth and tenth grade classes pertaining to the following: ● Conflict Resolution ● Anger Management ● Respect for others and Social Media ● Scholarship Pep Rally . Ninth/Tenth grade assemblies on:  Bullying  Making positive decisions  Positive relationships 9 th and 10 th grade students Safety Coordinator 9th,10th grade students All students/ teachers Sept – October, 2018 AP PPS Fall, 2018 Safety Coordinator Sept 2018 - June 2019 All Faculty 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  All teachers will have opportunity to use school provided student survey (via google) to survey students on teacher specific questions in order to provide teacher with instructional feedback from student perspective. The school will work to create a Conflict Resolution Center available for students to use as needed in order to promote positive and peaceful steps in resolving conflicts. ----------- The Principal and Safety Coordinator meet each week along with the , CSD, AP PPS, APO AP ISS to review OORS data and trends. From these meetings pertaining to security data, trends are established and SSA deployment and Dean Deployment schedules are adapted as needed. School aides are also assigned to support school staff. Classroom presentations, parent conferences and assemblies are organized as needed to address individual or groups of students. Using OORs data (incident location report), identify teachers most in need of support with de-escalation strategies (as per 2017-2018 report, as well as continued identification thought the year)and provide training in TCIS All students September 2018-June, 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 All students Safety Coordinator Principal, Safety Coordinator, DSS Level 3 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  The school will continue to implement Restorative Practices through the use of a Restorative Hub geared towards an alternative to suspension and a proactive attempt to use restorative and guidance strategies to alter negative behavior. The Restorative Center will be manned by teachers, deans and guidance personnel. Safety Coordinator Safety Coordinator, AP PPS, Deans, Guidance counselors. September 2018-June 2019 Targeted teachers September 2018-June 2019 All students involved in minor disciplinary incidents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Weekly Phone Blasts, Parent assemblies during parent teacher conferences and monthly SLT and PTA Meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday Professional Development time DOE Training in restorative Circles Wagner College Staff and students Community school Staff Community School Funding SLC Teacher Meetings Focus School Funding CBO Support UAU Funding Supervisors Student Health Center Staff Counselors Conflict Resolution Staff Deans Mental Health Staff School funding for Thursday Night Guidance sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019 student suspensions for level 3 & 4 suspensions will be reduced to a maximum of 60 for the Fall, 2018 term. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  OORS report - incidents and suspensions by level and location The Principal and AP security meet along with the AP PPS, APO to review OORS data and trends. From these meetings pertaining to security data, trends are established and SSA deployment and Dean Deployment schedules are adapted as needed. School aides are also assigned to support school staff. Classroom presentations, parent conferences and assemblies are organized as needed to address individual or groups of students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS: ● Strong instructional leaders committed to collaboration ● Dedicated time each week for collaboration through Circular 6 professional activities Time for teachers to collaborate on lessons NEEDS: ● Professional development on UDL, UDB, Teacher team facilitation skills and protocols ● Time for teachers to collaborate on lesson study by planning together, implementing and lesson review ● Development of performance tasks and assessments to inform collaborative discussions 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Data Trends: for the 2018-19 school-year the following are the percentages of students who attained 10+ credits: Class of 2017: 74% Class of 2018: 75% Class of 2019: 79% Students with mentors has an average daily attendance rate of 92%. AVID 9th graders in 2015-16 out-performed "Non-AVID" classmates in passing percentage of courses. Advance data indicated that teachers were not consistently aligned with regard to curriculum, assessments or pacing calendars. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Daily planning and collaborative sessions for staff members will provide the student support, lesson plans and formative assessments that will result in a minimum of 80% of students in grades 9, 10 and 11 to earn 10 or more credits a year in the 2018-2019 school year as evidenced by credit accumulation data in June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A new schoolwide scope and sequence was created to ensure all students are programmed for five and one half hours of instruction, fours years of math and science and three years of foreign language. All ninth grade students are programmed for a community school funded nine period day for an opportunity to accumulate an extra credit. Teachers will use google docs as a communication platform to collaborate on instructional resources, curriculum and lesson plans to ensure that teachers can benefit from transparent communication with colleagues. AVID teachers will meet at least once a month to discuss students and discuss efforts to provide consistency across students' school days. Community School partnerships will be utilized and organized to provide content specific intervention services for identified students Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration, guidance counselors, program chair and community school staff Supervisors all students Sept 2018-June 2019 Faculty Sept 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June, 2019 AP ELA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  in need through the use of mentors, push-in content intervention and after-school programs. AVID teachers CBO Staff All level one and level two incoming ninth graders are programmed for 90 minutes of math instruction per day. All Algebra 1 students are programmed for Algebra 1 classes instructed by Algebra for All trained teachers. All students Targeted students Sept 2018-June 2019 AP Math Teachers will use common preparation time as a time dedicated to course team collaboration. All teachers The Community School Director will organize and implement a series of PM classes throughout the school year. All students September 2018-June, 2019 October, 2018 Supervisors, Teachers CSD AP Guidance, Izone Coord. Principal, AP Guidance September 2018-June, 2019 Sept-December, 2017, Feb-June 2018 Under credited students The IZone Program will run a zero period class for 9 th and 10 th grade students in the spring term who need to attain additional credits needed for graduation. Ninth grade students and tenth grade students will follow a nine period day in order to have an opportunity to attain 15+ credits in ninth grade. 9 th and 10th graders . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  A tutoring center manned by college students and CBO staff will be organized to support students during lunch periods and after school. The IZone Program will provide opportunities for 11 th and 12 th graders to attain additional credits. ELA: 90% of ELL classes will be provided in the general education setting in order to develop skills and knowledge necessary for success on required Regents exams. The English staff will require portfolios from students to track and showcase performance tasks and student writing. NewsELA will support students in building academic skills necessary for success in reading and writing. English: ● Weekly focused writing assignment All students Under credited students Students in selected classes ELL students 9 th -11 th graders 9 th graders October - June, 2019 CSD AP Guidance, IZone Director AP ELA, ESL Coordinator AP ELA, ELA Teachers AP ELA, ELA Teachers AP ELA, ELA teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  ● Socratic seminars will be held each term ● Performance Tasks will be edited and resubmitted multiple times. Teachers new to Teaching (TNTs) will meet weekly with Lead teachers and Supervisors to develop capacity, use inter-visitations, share resources and discuss teaching. Topics include: Lesson Planning, Formative assessments, classroom management,lesson components, etc. New teachers will meet once a month with the Principal. Parents and family members will be kept informed on progress of individual students through the use of progress reports at the mid point of each marking period. This will result in parents having the ability to see generated grades (aligned to the grading policy) 12 times each year. In addition the principal reminds parents through a phone message each month to monitor student progress on PupilPath. Parents are given PupilPath login lessons during Ninth Grade Parent orientations, Family Night activities and throughout the year as requested of the Parent Coordinator. This system allows parents and students to access up-to-date individual academic information. All students New Teachers All Parents After each marking period, the principal, supervisors and counselors will analyze and share scholarship data pertaining to student credit accumulation. Fall term, 2019 Principal, APs, Sept 2018-June 2019 October - May All Year September, 2018 - June 2019 Supervisors, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Principal, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  All Parents Supervisors Midpoint of each marking period August, September 2018 and throughout the year After each marking period 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Weekly Phone Blasts, Parent assemblies during parent teacher conferences and monthly SLT and PTA Meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday Professional Development time Support for new teachers Circular 6 time Focus School Funding Funding for AVID from Staten Island Foundation DOE Funding for Wilson Reading Program Wagner College Staff and students Community school Staff Community School Funding CBO Support Liberty Partnership Funding UAU Funding IZone Program 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Supervisors Student Health Center Staff Counselors Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019 80% of students in grades 9,10 and 11 will have earned 5 or more credits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fall term Scholarship reports - STARS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS: ● AP Supervisors are well trained in the Danielson Framework ● Staff was trained in Danielson Framework as part of pilot program ● Professional development services of Wagner College for new teaching staff ● Community school funding ● Title I funding NEEDS: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● Percentage of students who attained 10+ credits in 2015-16: Class of 2017: 74% Class of 2018: 75% Class of 2019: 79% 49% of students in the student surveys for 2015-16 indicated that classroom lessons were engaging. Although high compared to NYC and Staten Island results, it still indicates that more than half the students do not find lessons engaging. 74% of teacher ratings for the 2015-16 school year were rated effective or better in the component pertaining to Formative assessment. This percentage needs to increase for our teaching staff to have a deeper understanding as to the level of student understanding for daily lessons. This also impacts decisions made with regard to the student skills needed to be emphasized in instruction. Consistency in instructional practices within content areas and across content areas Improvement in formative assessment practices and instructional decisions based on assessments Increase the use of student to student discourse in daily lessons  ENL student achievement  Hispanic and Black male student achievement Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. School leaders and teachers will develop and participate in targeted professional development opportunities that will result in 92% of Component 3b ratings (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques) will be Effective or Highly Effective (up from 87% in 2017-18) as measured by Advance Data reports by June, 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Ongoing professional development will be provided to staff by Cambridge Education with a focus on rigor, questioning and discussion strategies aligned to Danielson Component 3B. Pearson Prentice Hall will provide SIOP Training to interested teachers for support of ELLs. Teachers September 2018-June, 2019 Targeted teachers September 2018- June 2019 School Time Lab's Redesign will work with teachers in using time creatively to prepare students for the rigor of college and career by reinforcing higher level questioning and discussion, rigor and giving and receiving feedback. Supervisors Consultants Teachers trained in AVID strategies will share best practices during department professional development on Mondays. IMPACT Teams will be developed across content areas to focus on student inquiry. Selected teachers Selected teachers School Leaders will work collaboratively in norming observational feedback using the Danielson Rubric. Participating Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Supervisors, guidance counselors Sept 2018-June 2019 ELA supervisor Empowered teachers will present best practices during monthly Ed Camp sessions. Sept 2018 - June 2019 Supervisors 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  All Ap's The Dissemination Grant provides the opportunity for ten teachers to engage in teacher led coaching cycles grounded in the Danielson Framework. All staff will participate in a cycle of intervisitation focused on questioning and discussion techniques and rigor in the classroom. Teachers will participate in daily collaborative lesson planning by department in order to plan lessons with strategically embedded formative assessment strategies. The lessons will be delivered as a step in lesson study and will have teacher teams analyze the student work produced and determine the value of the assessment to inform next steps. Two Math teachers will attend summer training in Algebra for All program Selected teachers Targeted teachers All teachers Sept 208-June 2019 Principal Sept 2018-June 2019 All Ap's 2018-2019 Supervisors of ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies Fall 2018-Spring 2019 Principal Algebra teachers Fall 2018-Spring 2019 Selected Algebra teachers Summer 2018 AP Math AP Math 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  When developing lessons collaboratively and organizing lesson studies, teacher course teams will collaborate and develop formative assessment activities for daily lessons as well as uniform summative assessments for units. Election Day professional development will focus on increasing the use of student to student discourse in daily lessons (Cambridge Education) Supervisors, teachers September 2018-June, 2019 Supervisors, Teachers Supervisors, teachers Election Day, 2018 Supervisors Probationary Teachers will meet weekly in the Fall with Teacher Leaders and Supervisors to share best practices and to develop and deepen their understanding of lesson planning, lesson best practices, classroom management, SWD services, etc. The principal will conduct a minimum of 4 department walk-throughs with each Assistant Principal throughout the school-year. The walk-throughs will allow supervisors to discuss instructional patterns and identify professional development needs. Lead AP Fall, 2018 September, November, February, April, 2018 Supervisors, Teachers Principal, Supervisors, Teacher Leaders Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Weekly Phone Blasts, Parent assemblies during parent teacher conferences and monthly SLT and PTA Meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Monday Professional Development time Tuesday Professional time Full day professional development sessions Support for new teachers Focus School Funding Funding for AVID from Staten Island Foundation Supervisors Teachers Counselors Schedule adjustments Teacher per session Supervisor per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at 90% of teachers will be rated Effective or Highly Effective in Component 3b (Using questioning and discussion techniques) as measured by Advance Data reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance School-wide Data Reports for individual components Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS: ● Community School Director ● Large number of community based organizations in place ● Wagner College partnership ● SIUH Student Health Center ● Thursday night conferences ● NYCID Programs ● Strong PTA leadership 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  NEEDS: ● Stronger parent engagement ● Mental Health support for parents/families at home ● Additional effective forms of school-parent communication such as social media, etc. ● Stronger connections to Spanish speaking parents ● Stronger organization and monitoring of services and staff from outside organizations ● Larger menu of Extracurricular activities for students, especially targeted for ENL students Data trend: There are 488 Chronically Absent students returning this year and 88 new ninth graders entering high school identified as Chronically absent. . for 2017-18 92% of students with mentors were present each day. The average daily attendance for the school was 87%. The average daily attendance for 10th graders in 2017-18 was 84%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The community school database will show that 100% of 9th graders and 287 chronically absent 10th-12th grade students, will be aligned to a mentor, from a community based organization in order to improve student attendance to 92% for new 9th graders and 85% for 10, 11th and 12th grade students, as measured by ATS attendance data by June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The Community School Director will organize the CBOs to ensure that every 9th grade student is assigned a mentor to support the students for striving for daily attendance resulting in academic success. 9th graders September 2018-June, 2019 CSD, Mentors, Principal The Community School Director will organize the CBOs to ensure that all 287 chronically absent 10, 11, 12th grade students are assigned a mentor to support the student for striving for daily attendance resulting in academic success. 10th-12th graders September 2018-June, 2019 CSD, Mentors, Principal All assigned Mentors will complete and submit weekly mentoring reports detailing the attendance, needs and achievements of their mentees. 9th-12th graders September 2018-June, 2019 CSD, Mentors 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  The Community School Director will work with the AP PPS and guidance staff to collaborate and turnkey the weekly mentoring reports. Mentors and guidance counselors will set up necessary joint meetings to support increased student attendance. Monthly Attendance Committee meetings, and additional meetings as needed, take place with administration, guidance, mentors and attendance staff looking at and analyzing monthly attendance data. Sub committees conduct case management discussions pertaining to chronically absent students. Parent outreach is made daily through phone calls home made by our attendance school aides. Parents are also notified via daily phone messenger of their child’s absence. Monthly letters are sent home to inform parents when their child is not regularly attending school. Classroom teachers are given dedicated time for parent outreach to inform families of student performance and attendance. Community school staff will make home visits to students with poor attendance to intervene and support students in returning to school. If students and/or families are in need of support services, Community School staff will work with guidance staff for follow up. 9th-12th graders September 2018-June 2019 CSD, Mentors, AP PPS, Guidance Staff 9th-12th graders September 2018-June 2019 CSD, Mentors, AP PPS, Guidance Staff 9th-12th graders September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 9th-12th graders CSD, Mentors, AP PPS, Guidance Staff. Attendance Team Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  9th-12th graders September 2018-June 2019 CSD, Mentors, AP PPS, Guidance Staff. Attendance Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. New York Center for Interpersonal Development (NYCID) is our lead CBO. NYCID provides social workers, mentors and enrichment programs both academic and extracurricular for our entire school community. NYCID mentors receive a 5 day training prior to service and ongoing training on effective strategies and interventions when working with mentees. In 2016, NYCID opened a food pantry which is used by 600 families a month. NYCID also offers evening adult education classes including a bilingual GED program, medical billing certification, Food Handlers license certification and advanced culinary arts skills. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Mentors Teachers Wagner College Staff and students Community school Staff Community School Funding CBO Support Liberty Partnership Funding Supervisors Student Health Center Staff Counselors Teacher per session Supervisor per session Schedule adjustments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, fall attendance data will reflect over 92% attendance rate for 9th graders and over 85% attendance for 10th, 11th, and 12th graders. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS attendance reports, Chronically absent data obtained through Community School Attendance reports. We will be looking for weekly and monthly reports to indicate 92+% attendance rate for these students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Report card grades, Regents grades, attendance, state and teacher assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) HochmanWriting Program AVID Program Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) small group instruction, reduced class size,additional regents prep class,tutoring During student lunch periods throughout the day, 0 period and extended day, pds. 9 and 10. Tutoring Mathematics Report card grades, Regents grades, attendance, state and teacher assessments, Science Report card grades, Regents grades, Community School Hub Support ILitProgram NewsELA Literacy based strategies incorporated into Math lessons, Mathletics Math classes for level 1 and 2 students. Assistance in credit bearing classes, regents prep classes and tutoring to provide academic support, CBOstaff to provide homework help and tutoring. Tutoring Center Additional lab activities offered in all Regents ending courses with focus on One to one tutoring, small group instruction, reduced class size, peer tutoring, additional regents prep class During student lunch periods throughout the day, 0 period and extended day pds. 9 and 10. One to one tutoring, small group instruction, peer During student lunch periods throughout the day, 0 period and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Social Studies attendance, teacher assessments Report card grades, Regents grades, attendance, teacher assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Guidance referrals, Pupil Personnel Team referrals, parent request Living Env. and Earth science, peer tutoring, Make up lab opportunities Assistance in credit bearing classes, regents prep classes and tutoring to provide academic support, AIDP program, OST, to provide homework help and tutoring. Junior Achievement High School Heroes will support instruction in Economics classes. Wagner College partnership to support Participation in Government. A teacher will be available during lunch periods to support/tutor Global History students and reassess through new classroom exams. One on one counseling Group counseling Classroom presentations on guidance related topics ILitprogram for ENL students Social Worker Support tutoring, additional regents prep class extended day pds. 9 and 10. One to one tutoring, small group instruction, peer tutoring, additional regents prep class During student lunch periods throughout the day, 0 period and extended day pds. 9 and 10. One to one and group counseling sessions Scheduled worked out on an individual basis, presentations made during the day 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) The are 8 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services Provided: Mentoring, academic support programs, basic and emergency supplies and counseling services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school has close partnerships with the three Staten Island colleges to support teachers in attaining a Masters Degree in Education. Our status as a Title I school supports our staff in acquiring funding to support their acquisition of a Masters Degree. Specifically our partnership with Wagner College helps us to recruit their teachers as many Wagner College Education students spend time here as observers and student teachers. Teachers rarely look to transfer to another school so retention of effective teachers is not an issue. We offer high quality staff development workshops that are planned and implemented collaboratively with the administration and the Teacher Professional development Committee. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our staff receives quality professional development each Monday afternoon through a full menu of professional development options. New teachers work closely with the principal and supervisors to ensure that their first months of teaching are supported through observations and regular communication. Wagner College provides a professor from the Education Department to meet weekly with new teachers to support them in their instruction and classroom management. The Talent Coach and supervisors work with a select group of teachers (who teach Regents ending classes) to develop instructional strategies and practices effective for our students preparing for Regents exams. Circular 6 assignments provide the opportunity for teachers to collaborate in course teams to develop and assess lessons to address a myriad of student needs. Professional Development for all teachers is grounded in the Danielson Framework for Teaching focusing on Lesson Planning (Clear Instructional Objectives, Multiple Entry Points, Assessment), Engagement (Meaningful Peer-to-Peer Interactions and Resource) and Assessment (Formative and Summative). PD is also focusing on expanding our use of technology in the classroom and with students through blended and online learning . Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. School Leadership Team discusses the issue of assessments at meetings with teacher representation. Outside resources support the school with professional development on the best practices in using assessment results and data to improve instruction and student achievement. Academic departments plan school based assessments, develop and implement quarterly performance tasks and discuss best practices on choosing and using assessments to inform instruction. For the 2018-19 school-year each core academic department is developing a series of performance tasks and/or uniform assessments to inform and guide instructional and curricular decisions. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1Explanation/Background: Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 1,108,250 $134,427 0 17,230 15,457 10,867,757 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Sect. 5a, part 3 Sect. 5b, part 3 Sect. 5c, part 3 Sect. 5 d, part 3 Sect. 5e, part 3 Sect. 5a, part 3 Sect. 5c, part 3 Sect. 5 d, part 3 Sect. 5e, part 3 Sect. 5a, part 3 Sect. 5c, part 3 Sect. 5e, part 3 Sect. 5a, part 3 Sect. 5c, part 3 Sect. 5e, part 3 Sect. 5a, part 3 Sect. 5b, part 3 Sect. 5c, part 3 Sect. 5 d, part 3 Sect. 5e, part 3 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Port Richmond HS, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Port Richmond HS will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator and Community School Staff members will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;  Provide parents with weekly informational workshops facilitated by the Parent Coordinator  Open the school to parent activities on a weekly basis  The school will provide activities for parents to participate in that improve health and wellness of families  The school shall provide families with access to a food pantry to support family wellness.  The Community school director shall support staff in providing awards and refreshments for evening parent and student activities and celebrations. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Port Richmond HS , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; ● Conducting weekly guidance conferences on Thursday evening with counseling and supervisory staff available to meet with parents I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The 2018-19 school year brings us to the fourth year of our journey as a Community School. We are excited about our status as a Community School and we are enthusiastic about expanding our partnerships with our community agencies and local leaders on behalf of our students and their families. Our state-of-the-art Student Wellness Center is open and functioning daily to meet the physical health needs as well as the mental health needs of our students. Our Community School Director and our Parent Coordinator will be organizing activities opening the school to parents for a broad spectrum of activities (yoga, life skills class, college financial aid sessions, spin classes, job skill classes, GED, ESL, Medical Billing, etc.) designed to engage parents and family members in the daily life of the school. The Director 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  is also beginning the work of partnering with community organizations to bring job training opportunities to our school to support our parents in developing job skills. During the 2015-16 school year the school opened a food pantry to support the school’s families in meeting the nutritional needs of our students. The goal for the 2018-19 school year is to expand the number of families supported by our food pantry each month. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The community school database will show that 100% of 9th graders and 287 chronically absent 10th-12th grade students, will be aligned to a mentor, from a community based organization in order to improve student attendance to 92% for new 9th graders and 85% for 10, 11th and 12th grade students, as measured by ATS attendance data by June 2019. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? All community school activities support students academic and social emotional growth and physical well being. All of these components will lead to increased academic success for our students. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership NYCID Target Population 9th grade Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Mentoring & ELT During the 2018-19 school year, teachers will develop curricula and instructional strategies to meet the needs of all learners in the four core content areas. This will be evidenced by the following Regents Passing Rates for June, 2019: ELA: 72% Common Core Algebra: 75% Living Environment: 65% 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  NYCID 10th - 12th grade Chronically absent students Mentoring & Family Outreach YMCA 9th & 10th grade ELT UAU 9th - 12th Grade Learn & Earn Career and College Counseling SAT Prep Earth Science: 60% Global Studies: 65% US History 72% The community school database will show that 100% of ninth graders and 287 chronically absent 10th, 11th, and 12th grade students, will be aligned to a mentor, from a community-based organization in order to improve student attendance to 92% for new ninth Graders and 85% for tenth, eleventh, and twelfth grade students, as measured by ATS attendance data in June 2019. Daily planning and collaborative sessions for staff members will provide the student support, lesson plans and formative assessments that will result in a minimum of 80% of students in grades 9,10 and 11 to earn 10 or more credits a year in the 2018-2019 school year. During the 2018-19 school year, teachers will develop curricula and instructional strategies to meet the needs of all learners in the four core content areas. This will be evidenced by the following Regents Passing Rates for June, 2019: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  ELA: 72% Common Core Algebra: 75% Living Environment: 65% Earth Science: 60% Global Studies: 65% US History 72% Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community School Funds, AIDP Funds, and grant monies are used to fund community school activities Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  4. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Weekly Community School Meetings are held with all CBO's in the building to share and discuss strategies and services to promote increased student achievement and attendance. Community School Director meets weekly with principal and assistant principals of administration. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students CBO's and school staff meet regularly to review attendance and academic data to promote student success. New Visions data tools as well as DOE systems are used to gather this information. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Teachers are funded by school and CBO for ELT. Mentors are hired by CBO. Extended school hours needed for all community school after-school activities. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 9/2018 - 6/2019 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Port Richmond High School currently has 148 ELLs in grades 9-12 who are receiving English Language instruction via our ENL standalone, Integrated ENL and/or Dual Language programs, as supported by Parent Choice forms, completed upon admission. In keeping with the school’s vision for all students to become college and career ready, we will create a College and Career Exploration program designed specifically for our ELL population. The objective of the program is for ELL students to become knowledgeable about the world of work, explore college/career options and research colleges. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: · conduct workshops. The topics include accessing and manipulating Pupil Path and graduation requirements (transcripts, Regents exam and credit accumulation).&nbsp;Parent engagement activities will provide college access support and help bridge the gap between students, parents and teachers. Appropriate staff will interpret in the languages available. In-house staff will conduct parent workshops.&nbsp;&nbsp;Two times a year, on a Sunday, we will have an In order to engage parents in monitoring the academic progress of their children, we will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities “Awards Night” to celebrate academic success. &nbsp;Port Richmond High School is collaborating with "Make the Road New York," to support students and families with immigration and educational services.&nbsp;&nbsp;Parent needs and interests are assessed through the Parent Survey of the School Progress Report and through informal interviews with teachers and the parent coordinator. The Title III program will fund the cost of the workshops, parent outreach and refreshments.&nbsp;Invites to workshops will be mailed by the parent coordinator in Spanish, Arabic and Chinese. The workshops will coincide with the distribution of report cards. Attendance, invitations and agendas will be kept in a folder. The ENL coordinator and the Parent Coordinator will hold the parent engagement activities. The parent engagement activities will be held in November 2018, February 2019, and April 2019.&nbsp;&nbsp;The sessions will be held from 12:00 - 2:00pm. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Port Richmond High School Borough Staten Island School Number 445 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Principal Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Aziz Elabida Teacher/Subject Area Damaris Suarez/Math/ENL Coord. Teacher/Subject Area Joseph Mudgett/ENL Related-Service Provider Frances Riozzi Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Riana DiPalma Coach type here School Counselor Blaise Corso Parent Ana Guzman Parent Coordinator Kelly Doyle Field Support Center Staff Member Mildred Cordova Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1487 Total number of ELLs 105 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.06% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 2016-17 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 19 19 17 17 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 19 17 36 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers assess students by using Achieve3000; it is a tool to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs. The program is built in level-set test, which provides an immediate and accurate assessment of each student’s reading abilities, with a breakdown of specific literacy skills. (i.e. reading comprehension, vocabulary, identifying the main idea, etc.) This program is also very helpful for identifying needs of SIFE students. Since the data is available online it is easily shared between ENL and ELA teachers and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87  provides a basis for discussions with other content area teachers so that instruction can be tailored to meet the needs of students who are striving to perform at grade level. We are also implementing ILIT. The data reveals that ELLs are not reading at grade level, struggle with reading comprehension and vocabulary skills due to language acquisition needs. Based on the insight of the data we can differentiate instruction in content areas, create groups according to levels and address the language needs of our ELL population. Disaggregation and analysis of ELL Regents indicate that ELLs are not meeting benchmark levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Guided by the NYSESLAT results and the post secondary requirement we focus on providing ENL student with skills and foundation in reading and writing. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Teachers analyze student's work through protocols to assess student strengths and challenges, to guide instruction. In order to evaluate how well our programs are helping our ELLs make progress, we look at our Annual Yearly Progress and monitor NYSESLAT scores, NYS regent’s results as well as credit accumulation and graduation rates. There is ongoing collaboration amongst teachers. Teachers are encouraged to attend professional development training on how to teach ELLS. The success of ELLs relies on a culturally and linguistically diverse school, and parent involvement activities. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers will differentiate instruction that is culturally and linguistically appropriate to the needs of the class population. Teacher will use data to guide instruction and group students by skills and language. Students will also keep portfolios with work. Instructional strategies include but not limited to read aloud, shared reading, guided reading, literature circles, cooperative learning, differentiated instruction, daily writing experiences, vocabulary building, teacher modeling and group work. In order to raise student expectations there will be an after school program and a Saturday program to address the needs of our ENL students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable, we are a grade 9-12 school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 94 students sat for the NYSESLAT Exam. The data revealed: Entering 2; Emerging 10; Transitioning 20; Expanding 38; and commanding 7 and 28 remmained the same 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers will provide students with 75% informational text and literature, chunk informational text, differentiate, use news based articles and create interdisciplinary passages Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 88  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In an integrated setting, instruction is delivered to ELLs through an ICT model where one teacher is a content teacher and the other teacher is an ESL teacher. In this setting, ELLS received extra language and content support from both teachers. The ESL teachers provide instructional accommodations and interventions for ELLs in different content areas. In a stand-alone setting, the teacher is dually certified to teach ESL and ELA. The teacher uses the native language of the students for support. Students received materials in both the English and students’ languages. Students are grouped based on their proficiency levels in both settings. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Two certified ENL teachers service the ENL program. All entering level students receive 129 minutes (three 43-minute class periods) of daily English/Language Arts instruction, for a total of 645 minutes per week. Classes consist of a double-period literacy block and a single period in which cultural awareness, skills and grammar are emphasized. Transitioning level students receive 86 minutes (two 43-minute class periods) of ESL instruction daily, for a total of 430 minutes per week. For entering, there is one period of balanced literacy instruction in which the four modalities of writing, speaking, listening and reading are emphasized. The second period emphasizes skills, grammar and vocabulary building. Expanding level students receive 43 minutes of ESL and 43 minutes English/Language Arts instruction a day. The English Language Arts instruction is delivered through a grade-appropriate mainstream English course, which meets 43 minutes a day, five days a week. There are two levels within the Expanding group, with one group focusing on skills that will assist them in transitioning to the mainstream. All ESL courses address the National and New York State English as a Second Language Learning Standards. Native Language Arts instruction is supported through translated materials, dual-language materials, a new native language library in the classroom and a circulating native language library for both parents and students in the PRHS School Library. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In general, ELLs are placed in content area classes according to their grade level. These classes are taught in English. Content teachers are being supplied with native language materials and bi-lingual glossaries and dictionaries to help them support ELLs. In response to recent results in Global History and because we have a Global History teacher who also holds a bi-lingual license, a bi-lingual Global history class has been formed. The results of students in this class will be monitored. As our school shifts to comply with Common Core Standards, ELLs are also being exposed to the increased rigor of all classrooms. Our ELL's become connected to fellow students, teachers and support staff by belonging to one of our smaller learning communities. The materials used during instruction are both fiction and non-fiction based. In both cases, the teachers try to choose the most interesting topics for students based on a student survey conducted earlier in the year and based on ongoing interest surveys. Some of the materials are connected to the students’ cultures or are written by authors from the students’ countries or language. The lessons are structured according to the protocols of sheltered English model. The lesson contains language and content objectives, interactive learning activities in different ways (whole class, partners, groups and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 89  individually), different means of presentation and representation of materials and assessments such as the use of audio-visual materials, pictorial, interactional, hands-on activities, writing with the support of graphic organizers, reading and filling out the chart that asks for the main idea, evidence, sources and pages/ paragraphs where the evidence is found. The ESL teacher supports ELLs by using the native language when applicable, side-by- side translation, providing a simple version of the text, the use of dictionaries, grouping students with those who speak the same language, but they are more advanced and the use of ESL strategies. Students learn the content-based skills as guided by the common core learning standards. For example, in literature, students are required to identify and analyze different literary techniques and elements to show how authors use them to develop themes and supporting their thesis statements using evidence from the text. In non-fiction texts, students are supported to determine a central idea and provide textual evidence to support their answers, write a persuasive paragraph and essay to defend their claim using arguments and recognize the counter-claim. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? While it is challenging to assess all students in their native languages because we do not have teachers who speak all the languages represented in our school, students are instructed to write, once in a while, in both their home language and English. One of the ESL teachers can assess and give feedback to students who speak Arabic, French and Spanish. The other home languages are Google translated and are used as a tool to gauge the thinking process in the home language since Google translation is not accurate to be used as a reliable source of assessment. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Newcomers and SIFE students are programmed according to the LAB-R or NYSESLAT and receive small group instruction within the classroom for basic reading and writing skills. Teachers provide differentiated instruction for SIFE and newcomers at every proficiency level. SIFE students also receive adapted and enriched materials across the curriculum, such as text-books, tests, projects, and assignments. In addition, Achieve3000 supplements their instruction. They make use of the books and magazines in our native language in-class library and in our school library. Research shows that speakers of other languages succeed more readily when reading in their native language while acquiring a new language. The native language library promotes continuous growth in reading and comprehension skills in the native language while students develop proficiency in English. There are dedicated iPads to enhance technology skills and specialized dictionaries to support vocabulary development at all levels. Headphones and cassettes are available for individualized instruction and aural language acquisition. ELLs also receive targeted tutoring in ESL and content area courses in order to prepare them for the NYSESLAT and other grade-specific tests such as the PSAT. ELL progress on formative assessments is monitored and all teachers are analyzing student work so teachers can measure success and design re-teaching opportunities. After the assessment, teachers use the native language when it is possible; teach students the pre-requisites for the targeted skills; use different means of presentation as mentioned earlier; group the students strategically, and provide tutoring. After-school and Saturday tutoring sessions and clubs assist with the acquisition of American culture. Newcomers and SIFE students who are eligible for the ELA Regents or Regents examinations in the content areas are monitored by the ESL staff and attend content-specific tutoring sessions for these examinations. All English/ESL Department mid-term and final examinations are modeled after ELA Regents reading and writing tasks. ESL teachers adapt these examinations to their students’ proficiency levels. Newcomers and SIFE students are also paired with a more English-proficient school buddy. Newcomers, in addition to the ESL strategies discussed earlier, Newcomers are offered 4 extra periods of English during the week and Saturday academy where they receive more support. Developing, students at a developing stage receive more linguistically demanding texts and they are provided with the same curriculum as English speaking students with some minor adaptations of the texts. Learning activities are context-rich and culturally based in many cases. They also benefit from multimedia presentations of instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 90  For students receiving service from 4-6 years, the program offers many of the above services and presents the students in this group with more challenging text-books and writing and research assignments. Differentiated instruction takes place within the classroom and at after-school or Saturday enrichment and tutoring sessions. Students participate in literature circles utilizing books on tape, targeted small-group discussion, and reader response writing assignments. Students also use the Achieve3000 web-based individualized reading program to increase reading proficiency during school and after school for enrichment. Students begin to set individual goals for achievement and take more responsibility for their own success. Special emphasis is placed on NYSESLAT, PSAT and SAT preparation. There is targeted tutoring for ELLs who are eligible for the ELA Regents Examination. Mid-term and final examinations are modeled on ELA Regents reading and writing tasks. ESL teachers share a common planning period during which they analyze student work and outcomes from Achieve3000, NYSESLAT testing, mid-term and final examinations. They diagnose barriers to success and then plan instruction to meet those needs. ELLs at all levels are encouraged to join and to participate in the many student-centered activities at Port Richmond, such as sports, SING, school play, band, service organizations, student government, or newspaper. High school graduation, credit accumulation and college readiness are stressed through the classroom teachers, ESL coordinator and assistant principal, and guidance counselor. Long-Term ELLs also receive all of the previously mentioned strategies, as they continue to be integrated into the instructional model. There is an increased emphasis on guidance and individualized programming in order to determine a plan for success in attaining proficiency and completing high school and its requirements. More emphasis is placed on college readiness. Ongoing individualized conferences with ELLs, their parents and ESL staff continue. Additional liaison takes place between ESL teachers and content area teachers to enhance success for these students across the curriculum. Targeted tutoring is provided for students who have not completed their graduation requirements or passed the required Regents examinations. Advanced level long-term ELLs who have not passed the appropriate Regents examinations in English or Math are placed in corresponding Regents-ending preparation courses. After-school or Saturday tutoring and Regents Preparation are also offered. Students at this level continue to use Achieve3000 as a supplement to their instruction. Teachers of long-term ELLs will be given the opportunities to attend professional development to acquire support in acquisition language needs and instructional strategies on content and literacy learning for ELLs. Former ELLS receive at least 90 minutes of extra support by an ESL teacher per week. The former ELLs are also offered the tutoring opportunities. Former ELLs are eligible for testing accommodations that may include the use of native language glossaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs with special needs are programmed according to their IEP in either self-contained classes or mainstream classes with SETSS support. Students are also programmed in ICT classes with a content teacher and ESL or Special Education teacher. Students learn the content-based skills as guided by the common core learning standards. For example, in literature, students are required to identify and analyze different literary techniques and elements to show how authors use them to develop themes and supporting their thesis statements using evidence from the text. In non-fiction texts, students are supported to determine a central idea and provide textual evidence to support their answers, write a persuasive paragraph and essay to defend their claim using arguments and recognize the counter-claim. Teachers use sentence starters, paragraph frames, and brainstorming strategies to write. They also use think-aloud strategy to teach the metacognitive processes that happen as readers and writers try to make meaning of texts or writing. Another set of instructional strategies is that students learn how to interact with texts by engaging with assistance in the process of visualizing what is happening in the text and sketch it; making predictions and inferences based on the text clues and prior experiences; making self to text connections to activate their background and text to text or world connections; using mnemonic devices to boost their memory to retain content related concepts and connect lessons to keep the continuity of instruction and provide many meaningful opportunities to use the new learned vocabulary and practice the new acquired skills. All ELL-SWDs participate in extra curricular activities. The ESL teacher supports ELLs SWDs by using the native language when applicable, side-by- side translation, providing a simple version 2018-19 SCEP-FL 91  of the text, the use of dictionaries, grouping students with those who speak the same language, but they are more advanced and the use of ESL strategies. Annual goals are also aligned with ELL goals. Special programs for these ELLs include Achieve3000, a highly successful reading program focusing on differentiated, individualized instruction. This program also provides built in diagnostic and resource features. ELL-SWDs receive support from the Instructional Support Services Department, the School Based Support Team, Speech and Language related services, and the ESL team. Bi-lingual paraprofessionals and/or speech and language push-in or pull-out support are provided according to the requirements of the child’s IEP. ELL SWDs are invited to attend after school tutoring and the Saturday program. Special Education teachers are mandated to complete an annual review for IEP students. During the annual review meeting, teachers collaborate to write annual goals for the students. The annual goals of students are also aligned with ELL goals. The teachers structure lessons to address the measurable annual goals of IEP students during instruction. Teachers of ELL-SWDs have access to the student’s IEP through SESIS. To address testing accommodations during Regents week the testing coordinator assigns rooms to ELL students and ELL-SWDs as per the student’s IEP. In the ICT classroom, the Special Education teacher arranges to tests students in a separate location. As per, the general education classroom, the mainstream teacher makes arrangements with the Special Education Assistant Principal during class assessment days to accommodate the testing needs of students. There is an IEP coordinator that reviews IEPs to ensure that students are receiving the mandated services and are appropriately programmed. The related service provider must enter a first attend date for any ELL- SWDs with relate services. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL SWDs who receive Integrated Co-Teaching as mandated on their IEP are programmed according to their english level. ESL and content teachers use multiple instructional strategies to teach our ELL-SWDs. Teachers use sentence starters, paragraph frames, and brainstorming strategies to write. They also use think-aloud strategy to teach the metacognitive processes that happen as readers and writers try to make meaning out texts or writing. Another set of instructional strategies is that students learn how to interact with texts by engaging with assistance in the process of visualizing what is happening in the text and sketch it; making predictions and inferences based on the text clues and prior experiences; making self to text connections to activate their background and text to text or world connections; using mnemonic devices to boost their memory to retain content related concepts and connect lessons to keep the continuity of instruction and provide many meaningful opportunities to use the new learned vocabulary and practice the new acquired skills. In addition to the curriculum, ELLs use technology to access some reading and writing programs such as Achieve3000 and ILIT (inspire literacy). These two programs provide a wide range of topics that students are interested in and, after assessment, adjust the readability Lexile. The Achieve3000 has materials in English and Spanish so that Spanish-speaking students can use to support their learning. As for the ILit, it is a multilingual program that offers reading materials in all subject areas and can be translated to 45 languages. All languages that are represented in our school are included in the ILit program. Students who are ENL-SWDs are put in an ICT class setting where there is an ESL and Special education teacher. ELLs are encouraged, welcomed and sometimes mandated to take extra tutoring classes as part of their daily program from Tuesday through Friday in addition to other PM school classes and Saturday Academy. ELLs are encouraged, welcomed and sometimes mandated to take extra tutoring classes as part of their daily program from Tuesday through Friday in addition to other PM school classes and Saturday Academy. Students with disabilities participate in an integrated co-teaching model, which is our least restrictive environment. The needs of ELLs with IEPs are met by the general education teacher and the ESL teacher. All teachers have access to the student's IEP on SESIS. The testing accommodations are in kept in a locked file cabinet in the classroom. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. An analysis of ELL Regents indicate that ELLs are not meeting benchmark levels: English CC 16/60; Algebra CC 12/27; Geometry 3/28; Algebra 2 2/6; Living Environment 8/35; Earth Science 3/25; Chemistry 1/7; Physics 2/4; Global History 13/33 and US 2018-19 SCEP-FL 92  History18/36. Academic Intervention Services are provided for all students who have demonstrated a need in a specific academic or skill area. Such activities include reduced class size for more individualized instruction, Saturday school, and after-school tutoring. Intervention services include components to meet the specific needs of students in the graduating cohort who have not met the graduation requirements regarding the ELA exam and a Math Regents exam. For ELLs, PRHS offers after-school and Saturday enrichment in English Language Arts and media literacy, that addresses reading proficiency through close collaboration with the Literacy Coach, who provides reading comprehension strategies as well as the Achieve3000 program. There is also targeted tutoring for ELLs for the NYSESLAT, ELA Regents. There is also tutoring for ELLs for Math, Global History, American History, and Living Environment Regents examinations. ELLs eligible for Supplementary Educational Services (SES) are eligible for skill-building tutoring in English and Mathematics. Specialized tutoring in English and Mathematics targeted to the subgroups of Hispanic ELLS and ELL students with disabilities who have not passed the ELA or Math Regents exams is also provided. Academic intervention services are offered in English with native language support according to budgetary restrictions and availability. Teachers analyze student work, identify the needs of students and implement intervention strategies to support ELLs. Some interventions in content areas include but are not limited to Spanish and English; Arabic and English teacher model mini-lessons, video based lessons, classwork, assessments available in English and Spanish and Arabic and English, ILIT software, daily instruction incorporate Hochman strategies and teacher to student tutoring (one to one intervention). The students who reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT examination are afforded continuing transitional support (2 years). They may receive testing accommodations as allowed by the State of New York for all Regents examinations. These include the use of glossaries, extended time and a separate location. In addition, PRHS former ELLs are still monitored by their guidance counselor and the ESL coordinator and are invited to participate in all ELL tutoring and academic intervention programs, cultural activities and functions. FELLs are encouraged to become a vital part of the mainstream life of Port Richmond High School, but are considered part of the ESL family as long as they are registered in the school. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the 2015-2016 school year, Port Richmond ESL teachers are reviewing lessons and new materials with the intent of aligning instruction with the Common Core Standards so as to increase and accelerate reading comprehension and enhance all of the language acquisition skills. Several iPad apps are being explored and utilized in the classroom in order differentiate instruction and to increase the technological awareness of ELLs. Supplementary Educational Services (SES.) tutoring for eligible ELLs will be offered in ELA and Math, and peer tutoring will be offered assigning bi-lingual tutors with ELLs who speak the same language. We are planning a cross-cultural celebration in the spring. The number of college visits for ELLs will be increased. A Spanish-speaking mailbox has been added to the PRHS telephone service. In order to continue success in the program, teachers will continue Achieve3000. It works well with ELLs. The school also purchased the ILIT software. Port Richmond High School will hire teachers with an ESOL license. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal access to all school programs. They have the opportunity to enroll in any of our Small Learning Communities: Business Entrepreneurship, Culinary Arts, Gateway Honors, JROTC, Academy for Careers in Education and Public Service, Med Tech Academy and the Television and Media Arts Academy. All students, including ELLs, are eligible to participate in sports, musical, dramatic, and other club activities that take place after school or on Saturdays. Notices and backpacked, school-specific communiqué’s are simultaneously provided in English and in the most frequent Department of Education supported languages. The ESL office, a place that ELLs call their “home,” also provides information in supported languages. ELLs are 2018-19 SCEP-FL 93  strongly encouraged to participate in specially designed after school programs such as the 'ELL Film Critic Club', which affords them the opportunity to learn about American as well as other cultures through film. Students are then encouraged to analyze the films, discuss them and critique them, which helps them improve their English language skills. "Good Morning Port Richmond," our weekly news show, features interviews and stories about teams, auditions for student theater productions, fund raising events, blood drives, our annual 5K walk and other school events. This has been extremely helpful for ELLs, since it provides faces to go with names of people they need to see in order to sign up for various school activities. ELLs are members of SING, the cheerleading, football, basketball, volleyball, tennis, and soccer teams. ELLs are also members of the classes that work on "Good Morning Port Richmond," so they have the opportunity to be involved in the production of the show. ELLs are welcomed to attend general after-school and/or Saturday targeted Regents preparation in Math and English, SES Math and English skills tutoring (if eligible). They are also offered specific after-school and/or supplemental ESL English tutoring and after-school cultural awareness and supplemental guidance counseling sessions. ELLs will be invited by the classroom teacher, flyers and invitations. ELL students are encouraged to participate in all sports program offered by Port Richmond High School. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. There are many instructional materials, including technology, to support ELLs in all content areas. The web-based Achieve3000 program is primarily used in ESL and ELA classes and ESL after-school enrichment, but the non-fictional articles address topics in Math, Social Studies and Science. ESL students utilize a number of supplemental texts to support learning, including the Milestones and Visions series. Books on tape, leveled classroom libraries in English, native language libraries in the classroom and the school library, and NYSESLAT preparation books all support ELL achievement. Smart boards are utilized extensively with ELLs in core subject area classes. ELLs have access to a dedicated bank of iPads in the ESL classroom, and computers in any of the four computer laboratories. ELLs also have access to video and audio technology in the classrooms. ELLs can also participate in the television media class held in Port Richmond’s television studio as well as a media literacy PM school. Some ELLs in the TV SLC, take part in producing our weekly news program, “Good Morning Port Richmond”. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided through the native language libraries, native language magazines and newspapers. There is also a native language lending library for parents, native language translation glossaries, and internet-based translation programs. Translations on the DOE homepage website, translated materials provided by the Department of Education, school-specific translated materials through the Department of Education Translation Unit, DOE supported telephone translations, contracted translation services for the Student Handbook and Parent Handbook, and in-school person-to-person translation through the bi-lingual guidance counselor, bi-lingual deans and other teacher and staff volunteers. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and correspond to our students, who are in grades 9-12 and who range in age from 13 – 21. The required services correspond to the requirements of the beginner, intermediate and advanced levels of ESL and to accumulating the appropriate credits and passing the required examinations for graduating from high school and the goal of attaining proficiency in English. All students will receive all content material at an age appropriate level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? There are many instructional materials, including technology, to support ELLs in all content areas. The web-based Achieve3000 program is primarily used in ESL and ELA classes and ESL after-school enrichment, but the non-fictional articles address topics in Math, Social Studies and Science. ESL students utilize a number of supplemental texts to support learning, including the Milestones and Visions series. Books on tape, leveled classroom libraries in English, native language libraries in the classroom and the school library, and NYSESLAT preparation books all support ELL achievement. Smart boards are utilized extensively 2018-19 SCEP-FL 94  with ELLs in core subject area classes. ELLs have access to a dedicated bank of iPads in the ESL classroom, and computers in any of the four computer laboratories. ELLs also have access to video and audio technology in the classrooms. ELLs can also participate in the television media class held in Port Richmond’s television studio as well as a media literacy PM school. Some ELLs in the TV SLC, take part in producing our weekly news program, “Good Morning Port Richmond”. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the beginning of the school year, there are three 9 th grade orientation meetings for all incoming 9 th grade students, including ELLs. There is a Freshman Orientation night in June and another Freshman Orientation night in September prior to the first day of classes. In August, there are orientation days for all 9 th grade students, including ELLs, during which the students participate in inter-active activities and meet other incoming 9 th grade students. Their parents meet with the principal. All of these orientations feature presentations by the Principal, student representatives, and a breakout group meetings at which they receive an overview of the high school program and particulars about the ESL program. They also meet their child’s guidance counselor and the ESL staff and tour the school building. ELL parents and students also participate in the student-run club and activity orientation session. At the beginning of the school term, 9 th grade ELLs receive student buddies. There are also parent orientation and special PTA meetings in early September at which there is another ELL parent breakout group session. All breakout sessions are conducted in English and Spanish. Arabic translation is also available. Parents of all PRHS students, including ELLs, are automatically members of the PTA, which meets monthly. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELL students may take advanced classes in Spanish as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers are teachers of ELLs. PRHS will provide professional development to all teachers. ELL teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of English language learners: 15% of ELL training for the content area and 50% for the ELL teachers. Classroom teachers will attend professional development once a month during departmental meetings. Professional development topics will consist of: ENL best practices, ENL methodologies and alignment with CCSS, curriculum mapping for ELLs aligned with CCSS in all content areas, differentiation for ELLs based on levels of language proficiency and ELL data analysis of assessments. ELL teachers will attend PD during Chancellor Conference Days and throughout the school year. Administrators and ELL coordinator will deliver additional professional development. Professional development opportunities will be provided at the departmental and school levels to address the effective use of strategies for the teaching of reading, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 95  writing and literacy skills to all ELL personnel. Pupil Accounting Secretary Training offered by the Office of ELLs will be attended by PRHS personnel. School librarians are provided with ELL training through the Library List Service and at Chancellor’s Day Professional Development meetings sponsored by School Library Services. ESL teachers share a common professional period and meet daily as part of ongoing professional development. The ESL coordinator will attend numerous training sessions offered by the Office of ELL Compliance. School leadership will have all school pedagogue attend Professional Development training to learn about ELLs within the borough ELL support or Division of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS): Algebra: A Gateway to STEM; Writing Effective Language Objectives for ELLs of ALL Proficiency Levels (K-12) and Oral Language Development with Thinking Routines. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Ninth grade teachers attend a teacher focus group during professional development in early September to support staff in assisting all students as they transition from middle to high school. Teachers of ELLs attend this meeting and conference with the ESL teachers regarding the special needs of ELLs. ESL teachers remain a resource for all teachers of ELLs during the entire school year. Guidance counselors will also attend Professional Development to support and assist ELLs transition from middle to high school. School staff will attend professional development. Professional development requirement consist of 15% of ELL training for content area and 50% for ELL teachers. Professional development will consist of topics: Language Allocation Policy, Strategies to support ELLs in language development, ENL best practices, ENL methodologies in alignment with CCSS, curriculum mapping for ELLs aligned with CCSS in all content areas, differentiation for ELLs based on levels of language proficiency, strategies for the teaching of reading, writing and literacy skills, analyzing assessment and data. Sign-sheets and copies of workshop training agenda and materials for all professional development will be kept on file in a professional development binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent involvement is encouraged and welcome at Port Richmond High School. All parents, including parents of ELLs are automatically members of the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) and are encouraged to attend activities and meetings. The Parent Center, staffed by the parent coordinator is a welcoming place for ELL parents. The school produces a quarterly parent newsletter which contains an “ESL Corner” in both English and Spanish. There is a special ESL Parent meeting immediately preceding both the fall and spring Parent Teacher Conference evenings. There are special breakout groups for ESL parents and students at Freshman Orientations in June and September and at the 9th grade Parent Orientation meeting. Parents are invited to accompany students and chaperone for ESL-sponsored trips to cultural events (Broadway plays; museum visits) and college tours. Oral translation will be made available as requested by parent or as indicated during the identification and placement process. The paperwork will be kept in the student's cumulative folder. The school will meet meet with parents or guardian, in addition to parent teacher conference, to discuss learning goals and progress. The ENL coordinator will keep a copy of parent's attendance in the parent meeting binder. Port Richmond partners with several other agencies and Community Based Organizations to provide workshops and services to ELLs, including Wagner College, which is the driving force behind the “Port Richmond [area] Initiative,” St. John’s University, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 96  the Office of Community Outreach of the College of Staten Island, the Staten Island YMCA, all of which provide various forms of educational support, and the Community Health Organization, which provides speakers for parent meeting. Parent needs and interests are assessed through the Parent Survey of the School Progress Report, through informal interviews with teachers, the parent coordinator, and school administration in English and in the native languages whenever possible, and through questionnaires distributed at PTA meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. With our new designation as a Community School, we hope to be able to create more activities for parents of ELLs including English language courses, and babysitting services, so that parents can partake in our Friday Frolic or Saturday workshops. Parent coordinator will send translated invitations and/or make phone calls to the family to personally invite them to the activity, provide light snacks and drinks, create an agenda, parent folder and a translated school newsletter to provide families with weekly school information. Oral translation will be made available as requested by parent or as indicated during the identication and placement process paperwork kept in the student's cumulative folder. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 97 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Timothy M. Gannon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 98  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 99  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31445 School Name: Port Richmond High School Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Aziz Damaris Elabida Suarez Teacher ENL Coordinator No No No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Written and oral language interpretation needs are determined by analyzing responses to the Home Language Survey and ATS reports. Port Richmond also obtains informal data from direct feedback from parents through ongoing communication with school personal and Parent Teacher Conferences. School communications are translated into English, Spanish and Arabic. If other languages are needed, the school will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The school has provided staff with resources to assist in translation. The Multilingual Welcome Poster are posted in classrooms and around the school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 100  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Percent Written Preferred Written Preferred Oral Percent Oral Language Language Description ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CHINESE ANY CANTONESE FRENCH HAITIAN CREOLE HINDI ITALIAN KOREAN LATVIAN MANDINKA (AKA MANDINGO) MANDARIN MOSSI (AKA MORE) MALAYALAM ENGLISH RUSSIAN SINHALESE SLOVAK SPANISH SLOVENIAN URDU UKRAINIAN Language AL AR BG CH CN FR HA HI KO LV MB MN MO MY NO RU SF SO SP SV UD UR Written Preferred Written 1 33 6 19 0 2 3 1 5 1 1 1 0 1 1 1579 3 1 1 427 1 34 2 Percent Written Percent Written 0.05 1.55 0.28 0.89 0 0.09 0.14 0.05 0.24 0.05 0.05 0.05 0 0.05 0.05 74.38 0.14 0.05 0.05 20.11 0.05 1.6 0.09 Oral Preferred Oral 1 34 6 16 2 2 3 1 5 1 1 1 1 1 1 1571 4 1 2 428 1 36 4 Percent Oral Percent Oral 0.05 1.6 0.28 0.75 0.09 0.09 0.14 0.05 0.24 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 74 0.19 0.05 0.09 20.16 0.05 1.7 0.19 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. According to the RCPL report the preferred language is Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2018-19 SCEP-FL 101  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families New York State Testing dates January/ May/June Parent teacher Letters September/ November/ March/May Letters from school leadership Throughout the year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use bi-lingual staff; for other language we use T&I Unit. We use bi-lingual staff; for other language we use T&I Unit. We use bi-lingual staff; for other language we use T&I Unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide . Parent Teacher Conference September/ November/ March/May Family Night September/ May High School Information Night October interpretation service(s)? We use bi-lingual school staff; for other language we use over the phone interpretation service We use bi-lingual school staff; for other language we use over the phone interpretation service We use bi-lingual school staff; for other language we use over the phone interpretation service 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency the school can notify parents through an instant alert system (School Messenger) will communicate to parents / guardians. Each emergency presents a unique set of variables, which will be evaluated prior to a decision to use School Messenger. Those variables include nature of emergency, time of emergency, estimated duration of emergency, impact on immediate safety of students, direction given by law enforcement and emergency services agencies, and others. It is important to keep your contact information up-to-date at all times. We use bi-lingual school staff; for other language we use over the phone interpretation service. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 102  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional Development opportunities will be provided to all staff to address the policies and procedure of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. A copy of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 will be provided to staff. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parent involvement is encouraged and welcome at Port Richmond High School. Parents of ELLs are automatically members of the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) and are encouraged to attend activities and meetings. The Parent Center, staffed by the parent coordinator is a welcoming place for ELL parents. The school produces a quarterly parent newsletter which contains an “ESL Corner.” There is a special ESL Parent meeting immediately preceding both the fall and spring Parent Teacher Conference evenings. Brochures/flyers shared with parents are posted in the main office, by the security office and throughout the school. We use bi-lingual staff; for other language we use T&I Unit to translate. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Port Richmond High School will gather feedback through the parent Survey 2018-19 SCEP-FL 103 
