2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 31R861 School Name: STATEN ISLAND SCHOOL OF CIVIC LEADERSHIP Principal: NILSEN DONNA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Staten Island School of Civic Leadership 353100010861 Pre-K - 8 280 Regis Drive Staten Island, NY 10314 School Number (DBN): 31R861 718-697-5250 Phone Number: 718-697-5260 Fax: Donna Nilsen dnilsen@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Donna Nilsen Chad Farley CarolAponte and RuthDiaz Frank Morano Debbie Rodriguez Nicole Scerbo District Information Geographical District: 31 Vincenza Gallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island, NY 10301 Superintendent’s Office Address: vgallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 420-5690 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Staten Island FSC AnthonyLodico FSC: Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island, NY 10301 Executive Director’s Office Address: ALodico@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-556-5657 Phone Number: 718-556-8375 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Donna Nilsen Chad Farley Ruth Diaz Debbie Rodriguez NicoleScerbo Frank Morano Guido Sclafani NicoleScerbo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Chairperson / Staff Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jenny Spirocostas Megan Massimo Janice Kennedy LenaFerrera Antonio Frattalone Christine Diamond Tricia Garcia Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? In order for our children to be courageous leaders of tomorrow, they need sustained integration of timeless leadership principles directly into the day-to-day curriculum. To weave these principles into the school culture, we continue to implement the Franklin Covey Company’s The Leader In Me Program, a school-based leadership program and have achieved Lighthouse Status, a prestigious award given to schools who have met rigorous leadership criteria. Our students work together in the self-governance of their school and in simulations, scenarios, role-playing, and active engagements that parallels the actual processes and procedures inherent in a democracy. Programs such as the 2018-19 CEP 9  Center for Civic Education’s Project Citizen and We the People, Generation Citizen and iCivics are integrated into the Social Studies scope and sequence. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Family partnerships are embedded directly in the foundation of our school. We support our families and help them to help their children succeed by bringing family literacy to the forefront for our families; monthly Parent Engagement Projects are held to keep families active in the school environment and a low cost after school program that give our students a seamless school day. Ultimately, within a seamless educational experience, and with family partnerships deeply embedded in our foundation, our students will become disciplined, courageous leaders who are inspired to make a difference in America’s civic purpose. SISCL is founded on the fundamental belief that individuals must be educated for citizenship from the time they are very young, and must be vested in the public good and success of the community in order to make a difference. Our goal is to begin with great kids, then build a great school, a great community, and a great nation. Our students will, at the same time, build personal and private excellences, and the courageous leadership skills that promote effective public performance and service. We are focused on fostering a culture of excellence in the acquisition of essential skills in all educational disciplines through a highly structured, highly motivational school-wide core curriculum that orchestrates diversity in learning styles and the needs, interests and abilities of individual learners. We are founded on the belief that civic leadership is education in action for the good of the all people within a global society. As such, our students will develop the skills they need to make informed decisions as independent critical thinkers who understand their democratic rights as private individuals and their civic responsibilities as public participants in a network of social and political communities. An instructional emphasis is on diversity in learning styles, Triad Learning Communities, least restrictive special education classes and incorporation of a District 75 inclusion program. In order to give our students authentic real world experiences in community service and self-governance, we have formed purposeful partnerships that will provide students with the opportunity to apply what they learn through community-based service learning; Wagner College; The Jewish Community Center; The Staten Island Mental Health Society; Sea View Hospital Rehabilitation Center and Home; American Legion of Richmond County; The Richmond County Bar Association; and St. John’s University. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The Staten Island School of Civic Leadership (SISCL) opened its doors for the first time in September 2009. As a Pre K through 8 design, it was a first for Staten Island public schools. The New York City Department of Education sited the school on the new Elizabeth Connelly campus located at 280 Regis Drive on the north shore of Staten Island. SISCL is a zoned school. SISCL’s students include approximately 20% Black, 41.88% Hispanic, 19.89% White, 13.26% Asian or Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander students, 3.54% Multi-Racial students. The student body includes 3.98% English language learners and 23.09% special education students. Boys account for 47.51% of the students enrolled and girls account for 52.49%. The poverty rate is approximately 68.1%. Immigrants are originating from Mexico, Sri Lanka, the Middle East, and the Dominican Republic. The student population of 905 students is heterogeneously grouped within each grade according to a Triad/Team Teaching model and is supported by a pedagogical staff of 64 teachers. All teachers are certified and licensed. The school has two Assistant Principals, two Guidance Counselors, a Dean of Student Support, a full-time ESL teacher, Parent Coordinator and Secretary who work directly with the teachers and the Principal. SISCL’s school community works collaboratively through RTI, academic services, peer mediation and the Seven Habits Leadership Process and a Triad Teaching Model to address the academic and social/emotional needs of our general and special education students. These needs include closing reading, writing and math skills gaps, speech, occupational and physical therapy needs as well as transitioning and crisis de-escalation. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  The Staten Island School of Civic Leadership made the most progress in Framework for Great Schools Section 5A – Rigorous Instruction. Tied to teacher Impact Team inquiry work to develop, rigorous CCLS-aligned units of study / curriculum maps, we exceeded our goal of 2.5 percent increase in proficiency. Overall proficiency on the 2017-18 NY State ELA test rose from 56% to 62%. A key area of focus this year will Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers. Math Impact Team members will apply new inquiry-based math fluency and conceptual understanding strategies and collaboratively analyze Fall and Spring Performance Assessments and NY State Math Exams to improve Measurement and Data, Number System and Functions skills as measured by a 2% increase of all students achieving at or above proficiency level as measured by the New York State Mathematics exam and Go Math/CMP Math Unit Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R861 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 906 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 69 67 30 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 94 86 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 70.4% % Reduced Lunch 3.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 43.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 20.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.08 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 62.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES NO YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 83 84 93.4% 8.2% 25.1% 20.2% 12.5% 4.2% 4 14% 6.5 46.5% 74% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In cross grade, cross content team, Impact inquiry team meetings, we have reflected on the performance trends of our students. To maintain accuracy, we have confirmed our findings and implications using standards assessment from the Item Skills Analysis of the NY State Tests. We have collected and analyzed data from NYS standardized ELA and Math assessments and Performance Assessments in Social Studies and Science. In non-testing grades, student data was collected from various assessment sources including the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Leveling System. In literacy, the following trends were discovered during this school year and confirmed to complement the data for the students in previous testing years. We responded to the trends through instructional planning and targeted teaching. Summary of Strengths Spring 2018 NY State ELA Exam Grades 3-8 Rigorous instruction is a strength of our school as noted in our most recent Quality Review Report. For Quality Indicator 1.1 - Curriculum - it was noted, "School leaders and faculty ensure that instructional shifts are strategically integrated into the Common Core aligned curricula and ensure rigorous habits and higher-order thinking skills are emphasized in curricula and academic tasks, " which has "built coherence and college readiness resulting in all learners, including English language learners (ELLs) and students with disabilities (SWDs), across grades and subject areas, demonstrating their thinking." Our school will utilize our data trend analysis, the Framework For Great Schools and the Formative Assessment Process outlined in District 31's Core Collaborative instructional initiative to address our annual goal for rigorous instruction to meet the performance benchmark outlined in our goal below. Based on results from the 2018 NY State ELA Exam, our greatest strengths for each grade:  Grade Three: 3. W.RI.2:Reading Strand for Informational Text: Determine the main idea of a text. Students scored in the 80% 2018-19 CEP 13   Grade Four:4.RL.6:Reading Standard for Literature:Compare and contrast the point of view from which different stories are narrated. Students scored in the 81%.  Grade Five: 5. RL.4: Reading Standard for Literature:Determine the meaning of words as they are used in a text. Students scored in the 93%.  Grade Six:6. RL.4: Reading Standard for Literature:Determine the meaning of words as they are used in a text. Students scored in the 88%.  Grade Seven: 7. RL.4: Reading Standard for Literature:Determine the meaning of words as they are used in a text. Students scored in the 76%.  Grade Eight: 8. RL.2: Reading Standard for Literature: Determinea theme or central idea of a text and analyze its development over the course of the text. Students scored in the 78% Priority Needs Based on results from the 2018 NY State ELA Exam, our priority needs standards are listed below:  Grade Three: 3.RL.2:Reading Strand for Literature: Recount stories; determine the central message, and explain how it is conveyed through key details in the text. Students scored in the 47%  Grade Four: All strands are above the 50%  Grade Five: 5. RI.7:Reading for Informational Text:Draw on information from multiple print or digital sources demonstrating the ability to answer a question quickly. Students scored in the 32%  Grade Six: 6. RI.3:Reading for Informational Text:Explain the relationships between two or more individuals on specific information in the text. Students scored in the 49%  Grade Seven: 7. RI.3: Reading for Informational Text:Analyze how a text makes connections among and distinctions between individuals, ideas, or events (e.g., through comparisons, analogies, or categories). Students scored in the 49%  Grade Eight: All strands are above the 50% Grades K-2 ELA Needs Assessment Summary of Strengths Percentage of Growth From Fall 2017 to Spring 2018 - Performance Assessments -ELA Kindergarten:   LA.R-Reading foundational Skills-Phonics/word recognition-53% LA.W-Writing-61% Grade 1  All standards demonstrated less than 50 percent growth Grade 2    LA.2-Language-Conventions of standard English-68% LA.R- Reading Literature/Key ideas and details-67% LA.W-Writing-71% 2018-19 CEP 14  Fountas and Pinnell: K-2 Kindergarten: Letter Recognition: Uppercase - 95% Proficient Letter Recognition: Lowercase - 92% Proficient Sounds. - 88% Proficient Grade 1 Vocabulary - 87% Proficient Sight Words. - 81% Proficient Spelling. - 81% Proficient Phonemic Awareness (Upper and Lower Case letters – Letter Sounds) - 100% Mastered Grade 2: Dolch-Sight Words. - 64% Mastery of dolch sight list Vocabulary. - 68% Proficient Decoding and Spelling. - 88% Students in Grades K – 2 were over 64 % proficient in all areas Kindergarten: Priority Needs Percentage of Growth From Fall 2017 to Spring 2018 - Performance Assessments -ELA  LA.K-Language-Conventions of standard English-43% Grade 1    LA.1-Language-Conventions of standard English-41% L A.R-Reading foundational Skills-Phonics/word recognition-41% LA.W-Writing-28% Grade 2:  All standards demonstrated more than 50 percent growth Summary: Students in Grades K and 2 demonstrated the greatest growth in the reading and writing strands presented in the 2018 EOY ELA performance task. Overall growth for Kindergarten was 51 percent, grade one was 36 percent and grade two was 70 percent. Fountas and Pinnell results are also sighted as a strength as 64 percent of all students in grades K-2 were proficient in all skills tested.Priority needs include Language Conventions in grades one and two and writing in grade one. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 15  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, horizontal and vertical ELA teacher teams will collaboratively develop rigorous CCLS-aligned units of study / curriculum maps to improve rigorous instruction which will yield a 3.5% increase of students achieving at or above proficiency level, as measured by the New York State English Language Arts exam for grades 3-8 and Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Leveling System for grades K - 2. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Students will receive 120 minutes of literacy instruction daily including reading workshop, word study, small-group strategy instruction, vocabulary development, phonics, literacy centers and writing workshop. The instruction will be supported through curricula includingReady Gen, Wonders, and Wilson. The ELA teacher, with the support of the co-teachers in each triad, will direct the literacy planning, and co-teaching opportunities will be scheduled for strategic small group instruction to scaffold and/ or accelerate students’ literacy. K - 5th grade students ● Data driven curriculum planning and mapping as well as reviewing trends in student work and assessments in triads and team teaching along with support service teachers will be scheduled. Families will be informed quarterly using progress monitoring tools such as report cards, progress reports and notes, websites and newsletters, and parent outreach Tuesdays. ● Students will read informational and literary texts on the iPad through the myON digital reading program. MyON will test each student to determine initial Lexile level and will re-access for growth via cloze reading and comprehension quizzes every five texts or two weeks. MyON reading will occur in school during independent reading time, during enrichment activities as well as at home. ● Selected strands of Fountas and Pinnelladministered in the fall and again in the spring; Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Leveling System administered three times throughout the year; Wonders weekly unit assessments; conference and observation notes; early literacy checklists, rubrics, Reading Reform unit assessments, and teacher-made assessments and samples of student work. September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers in Grades K-5, Data Specialist, Technology Coordinator, Lead Teacher, Parent Coordinator, Administration Lower grade teachers are organized in triad models whereas three teachers are the primary teachers of two grade-specific classes allowing for co-teaching in various models including team teaching, parallel teaching, and support teaching. Lead teachers of ELA will provide AIS or small group targeted instruction to students identified in need according to formative data. This model supports 2018-19 CEP 17 meeting the needs of all students. ● Common Core Task-Based Assessments ● ESL Beginner/Intermediate explicit vocabulary instruction along with English grammar and phonics instruction ● The Renzulli Learning Program will be used to assess student interest and learning style. This interest inventory data will be used to support differentiated instruction and enrichment opportunities. The Renzulli activity search engine will also provide students with Common Core based lessons and resources. ● The Pathblazer RTI program by Compass Learning will be used as whole class and small group RTI support. Pathblazer engages students in pre-assessment to determine a personalized learning path of engaging, computer-based activities. The learning plan features summative and formative assessments and presents content and skills in different forms based on assessment to take advantage of student learning styles and preferences. Teachers can generate reports to monitor student outcomes and can select individual activities form the content library to use for whole class instruction with their standard daily lesson.  Teachers will implement Activate, a research-based comprehensive cognitive skills training program designed to improve attention, self-control and memory, with all students in Kindergarten through grade two. The program uses a combination of computer-based training games and whole-body physical exercises to increase the Executive Function of the brain to help improve classroom performance and close the achievement gap. The program will be implemented at least 60 minutes per week in three, 20-minute sessions. Assessments will be administered through the program and teachers and administrators will receive reports demonstrating student progress. These reports will be correlated with performance data to study impact. ● To achieve our goal, students will receive 90 minutes of literacy instruction daily utilizing the Universal Design for Learning including reading workshop, word study, and flexible 6-8 th grade students September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers in Grades 6-8, Data Specialist, Technology Coordinator, Lead 2018-19 CEP 18 Teacher, Parent Coordinator, Administration Intermediate teachers are organized in teams whereas four content-specific teachers will deliver instruction to students. Content teachers are also scheduled to service the needs of students through push-in Academic Intervention Services. small-group strategy instruction vocabulary development and writing workshop. ● In addition to the end-of-the year summative state assessment, students’ progress will be monitored through Benchmark Assessments, Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Leveling System and as well as writing rubrics, Common Core Performance Tasks, sixth and seventh grade DRP, and teacher-made formative assessments. ● We will schedule data-driven rigorous curriculum planning and mapping aligned to the CCLS as well as reviewing trends in student work and assessments in teams along with support service teachers. We will also administer Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Leveling System administered throughout the year; teacher created assessments and samples of student work; progress reports/report cards, sixth and seventh Grade-DRP observation data, and item analysis from the previous year’s state exam. ● Students will read informational and literary texts on the iPad through the myON digital reading program. MyON will test each student to determine initial Lexile level and will re-access for growth via cloze reading and comprehension quizzes every five texts or two weeks. MyON reading will occur in school during independent reading time, during enrichment activities as well as at home. We are part of MSQI and teachers in Grades 6, 7, 8 will incorporate Word Gen into the curriculum. ● In addition to stamina and skill building with myON, sixth through eighth grade students will also read e-books on the iPad through the LightSail digital reading program. LightSail provides students authentic, classic and modern digital literature as well as informational texts in science and social studies content areas. LightSail provides teachers real-time data as the class reads to monitor student engagement and reading progress. ● The Renzulli Learning Program will be used to assess student interest and learning style. This interest inventory data will be used to support differentiated instruction and enrichment opportunities. The Renzulli activity search engine will also 2018-19 CEP 19  provide students with Common Core based lessons and resources. The Staten Island School of Civic Leadership continues to support literacy instruction through the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI). MSQI offers specialized literacy coaching, Word Generation interdisciplinary vocabulary program, and funding for iPads and LightSail digital reading program. MSQI supports also helps monitor student growth through the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) reading assessment program. ● The Staten Island School of Civic Leadership (SISCL) is a school community committed to working collaboratively to effectively structure its educational programs to provide a child-centered, safe learning environment that recognizes and values individual talents and seeks to develop the academic and social skills of its students to make them college and career ready. ● At SISCL we take a team approach to all our school initiatives. This is evident in our Impact, interdisciplinary and vertical teams, our Professional Learning Cycle meetings with a specific focus, and our grade level meetings where common themes, i.e., unit studies, author studies, assemblies, grade projects, trips and special events are discussed and planned collaboratively. Included in the eight-week professional learning cycle, teachers participate in inquiry cycles to test new teaching strategies and efficacy through a Looking at Student Work and Learning from Student Data protocol. We have also used our grade meetings to focus on new initiatives and programs i.e., CCLS, learning from student work, performance tasks, assessment portfolios, the writing process, promotional standards and criteria, MSQI Word Generation and new curriculum initiatives. A Pupil Personnel Team meets weekly to address the needs of struggling students. ● At SISCL we encourage and promote the role of “teachers as leaders” by creating a school culture in which the staff takes the initiative to meet the Common Core State Standards by select teachers using Scholastic Code X and the Educating Powerful Writers program and collaborating on developing plans and programs to benefit the school community. The staff is encouraged and supported to seek new roles and responsibilities – to acquire new skills and knowledge though attendance at professional development workshops that can be incorporated into school leadership, i.e., teachers leading professional development workshops for their colleagues. SISCL has invested in a Peer Collabortive teacher who support teaching staff through classroom labs, surveys, and citywide instruction 2018-19 CEP 20  expectations based Professional Learning opportunities and differentiated Professional Learning sessions. ● Teachers have taken the initiative to access professional learning opportunities on their own and have been encouraged and supported to pursue those interests both with time, payment and professional books to enhance their learning. The only condition is to share their experiences with their colleagues. Inquiry Learning Communities have been at the heart of our staff development efforts. The alignment of programming and support of professional learning opportunities for the staff has been implemented through the SBO process. ● In response to the ELA data, a shift toward push-in Academic Intervention Services was arranged and delivered to students who were making the least progress. Push-in/SETTS/AISteachers will collaborate with classroom teachers. ● Using the pool of talented staff, trained teachers were matched and scheduled to meet with small groups of students across grade levels. Targeted small group instruction was planned and monitored to close gaps in students’ strategy and skill deficiencies. Students with high achievement were accelerated in peer book clubs and independent studies supported by teachers. ● One of our goals is to work with the children in our schools lowest third so that we can show improvement with their median growth percentile. Interventions will concentrate on the children’s weaknesses listed above. ● Teachers will be implementing Common Core Aligned Units of Study. They will use a mix of explicit teaching and student investigation. Teachers will incorporate explicit teaching of academic and domain-specific vocabulary associated with their Common Core aligned units. This vocabulary will be used as children read, write, listen and engage in discussions. All students will be provided access for learning through UDL including multiple means of representation, action and expression, and engagement. 2018-19 CEP 21  ● Teachers will incorporate speaking/listening standards and plan opportunities for a range of text- based conversations. The focus will be to implement the Socratic seminars across disciplines in grades six, seven, and eight. This will further our School-wide initiative to deepen student- to- student discussion and develop meaningful conversation skills through the use of collaborative conversation. ● Teachers will analyze student work and use their conclusions in the actual teaching and learning process. They will implement literacy units and tasks across all subjects so that students benefit from exposure to disciplinary literacy: the ability to read, comprehend, and advance content knowledge from subject-specific, grade-level text. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent coordinator, teachers, and staff will host educational family events/activities throughout the school year.  Teachers will conduct Curriculum Orientation Conference and/or Teacher Introduction Conferences within the 1st or 2nd month of the school year introducing them to the Curriculum Map and Common Core Standards.  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will continue to encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee throughout the school year, beginning in September 2018  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will provide material and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, particularly a leveled reading book list on the SISCL website throughout the school year, beginning in September 2018.  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will support or hosting Family Day and evening events;  Parent Coordinator will establish a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will host events to support, asserting leadership in education for their children, parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will encourage more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Teachers and service providers will provide written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Parent coordinator will continue to develop and distribute a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress  Teachers will provide school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will continue SISCL Leadership Awards Ceremony as an event following every PTA meeting 2018-19 CEP 22   Teacher Lighthouse Staff will continue to offer 7 Habits Signature Parent Training  Staff will continue to utilize a telephone messaging system that would provide parents with a prerecorded message from the principal or other administrator about upcoming events, important meetings or school emergencies  Administration and teachers will continue to offer electronic access to grades through STARS classroom and Pupil Path / Skedula.  Teachers will continue to provide electronic text message communication through Remind.com, Pupil Path, Class Dojo  PTA will continue to offer PTA Newsletter  Teachers and staff will conduct Curriculum Orientation Conference and/or Teacher Introduction Conferences  within the 1st or 2nd month of the school year introducing them to the Curriculum Map and Common Core Standards. SISCL Staff and Administration will continue to develop the SISCL email system and the SISCL website to establish and maintain a reliable source of communication and outreach. In addition, in grades 6-8 the use of electronic grade books such as STARS classroom and Pupil Path / Skedula. SISCL Staff and Administration will continue to provide Material and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, particularly a leveled reading book list on the SISCL website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Students in grades K-5 will receive 120 minutes of literacy instruction daily including reading workshop, word study, phonics, small-group strategy instruction, vocabulary development, literacy centers and writing workshop. ● To achieve our goal, students in grades 6-8 will receive 90 minutes of literacy instruction daily including reading workshop, word study, flexible small-group strategy instruction utilizing the universal design for learning vocabulary development and writing workshop. ● Lower grade teachers are organized in triad models whereas three teachers are the primary teachers of two grade-specific classes allowing for co-teaching in various models including team teaching, parallel teaching, and support teaching. Lead teachers of ELA will provide AIS or small group targeted instruction to students identified in need according to formative data. This model supports meeting the needs of all students. ● Intermediate teachers are organized in teams whereas four content-specific teachers will deliver instruction to students, which support a program where content teachers are also scheduled to service the needs of students through push-in Academic Intervention Services. ● Utilize strategies such as growth mindset and productive struggle to increase student engagement and encourage them to task academic risks. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 23  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will make grade-appropriate reading level gains as measured by the the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Leveling System. Additional Progress Monitoring Wonders weekly unit assessments; conference and observation notes; early literacy checklists, rubrics, Reading Reform unit assessments, and teacher-made assessments and samples of student work. Data-driven and rigorous curriculum planning and mapping aligned to the CCLS as well as reviewing trends in student work and assessments in teams along with support service teachers will be scheduled. Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Leveling System administered throughout the year; teacher created assessments and samples of student work; progress reports/report cards; Sixth through Eighth Grade- DRP observation data; and item analysis from the previous year’s state exam Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) ● Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Leveling System ● Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) Assessment ● Schoolnet Performance Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? SISCL earned a Well-Developed Rating in both Quality Review Indicators aligned to the Supportive Environment Framework Measure on the 2017-18 Quality Review. Indicator 3.4, High Expectations, was cited as an “Area of Celebration.” SISCL earned a 3.49 score on the 2017-18 School Quality Report in the Supportive Environment Category. These scores represent a measure .16 points higher than the district average and .10 points higher than the city average. The schools' indicators of strength include student attendance (79% of students with 90+% attendance), 83% positive response for teachers indicating social-emotional support for students. Eighty-eight percent of students indicate a positive response for Guidance support and 66 percent of students indicate they receive personal support and attention from their teachers. Priority needs for the Supportive Environment Indicator include classroom behavior and peer support for academic work. Both indicators are two points below city average on the 2017-18 School Quality Report. 2017-18 School Quality Report – Framework Elements Scores for Supportive Environment • Quality Review 3.4 – Well Developed • NYC School Survey – Survey Element Score - Supportive Environment – 3.26 • Students surveyed who agree or strongly agree they feel safe in their classes – 89% • Students surveyed with positive Classroom Behavior response – 60% • Social-emotional measure (Teachers) – 83% • Guidance support (Students) – 88% Comparison of Performance Assessments in Social Studies (Fall and Spring 2017-2018) Grade 6 • Overall scores went from 26% - 81% ( 55% increase) • LA.6-8 RH- Integration of Knowledge and Ideas- Scores went from 38% - 75 % ( 37% increase) • LA.6-8-WHST-Writing- Scores went from 12% - 83% ( 71% increase) Grade 7 • Overall scores went from 34% - 80 %( 46% increase) • LA.6-8 RH- Integration of Knowledge and Ideas- Scores went from 39% - 81% (41% increase) • LA.6-8-WHST-Writing- Scores went from 32% - 80 % (48% increase) 2018-19 CEP 25  Grade 8 • Overall scores went from 39% - 74% ( 35% increase) • LA.6-8 RH- Integration of Knowledge and Ideas- Scores went from 53% -61% (8% increase) • LA.6-8-WHST-Writing- Scores went from 33% - 76 % (43% increase) Service Learning Projects Completed in 2016-17 to 2017-18 Engagement in service Learning Projects has increased 22 percent from 18 to 22 projects. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, horizontal and vertical teacher teams will increase student participation in student-led service-learning projects, resulting in a 2% increase in school performance in the supportive environment section of the NYCDOE School Quality Report. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of Service Learning Classroom Projects Within and outside of SISCL classrooms, our students have and will identify community and/or public policy needs, apply their skills and studies to research solutions and planned service activities, implement the activities, and evaluate and reflect on the experiences and impact. Through explicit classroom service projects teachers and students will expand this work into more of our classrooms and lessons; especially as one reflects upon our mission statement which is based upon principles of school-community partnerships and reciprocity. Implementation of Service Learning Trackers Students will record any Service Learning Projects they have participated in in their Leadership Notebooks. This includes service learning projects completed in class, clubs, Student Government, Bliss Club, Mouse Squad, Student/Junior Lighthouse Teams, etc. Service Learning Tracker on display for school community outside cafeteria One person will volunteer to take responsibility for placing a Service Learning Project Badge outside the Cafeteria when a Service Learning Project has been completed. This badge can include the names of each class, club or group that participated. Continuation and strengthening of Leadership Notebooks Leadership Notebooks build on the foundation of giving students ownership of their own data. By giving students ownership of their own data, we communicate that they are leaders of their education. Students learn how to track and interpret data as they set personal and academic goals. Research has shown that the act of writing a goal greatly increases chances of accomplishing the goal when the goal is broken down into actionable steps. When the actionable step is tracked, academic or personal goals have an even greater percentage of success. The purpose of the Leadership Notebook is for students to track growth and understand goals. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers in Grades PK-8, Lead Teacher, Parent Coordinator, Administration All students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers in Grades PK-8, Club Leaders, Lead Teacher, Parent Coordinator, Administration All students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers in Grades PK-8, Lead Teacher, Parent Coordinator, Administration All students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers in Grades PK-8, Club Leaders, Lead Teacher, Parent Coordinator, Administration 2018-19 CEP 27  Continuation and Strengthening of SISCL Student Government to Support Service Learning All students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers in Grades PK-8, Student Government Coordinator, Club Leaders, Lead Teacher, Parent Coordinator, Administration SISCL is founded on fundamental principles that individuals must be educated for citizenship from the time they are very young, and must be vested in the public good and success of the community in order to make a difference. As such, our students are given the opportunity to develop the skills they need to make informed decisions and to understand their democratic rights as private individuals and their civic responsibilities as participants in a network of social and political communities. In order for our children to be the courageous leaders of tomorrow that we envision, we know that these leadership principles cannot be taught in isolation but must be woven into the school culture year after year. Our students work together in the self-governance of their school and in simulations, scenarios, role-playing, and active engagements that parallel the actual processes and procedures inherent in a democracy. Continuation and Strengthening of Sanford Harmony Curriculum Teachers will continue to incorporate Sanford Harmony specialized teaching strategies into classroom activities—from preschool through sixth grade—in an effort to reduce bullying, and help develop the youth of today into tolerant, compassionate, and caring adults for the future. Comfort Dog Program Teachers and staff will use SISCL's comfort Dog, "Riley" to work directly with students to improve school climate and social-emotional learning. The program uses the Mutt-i-Grees curriculum to provide students with life skills and help students develop effective communication and teamwork, conflict-resolution, problem-solving tactics and relationship-building. Leader in Me Leadership Process Teachers will continue to implement Franklin Covey Company’s The Leader In Me Program, school-based leadership process that teaches students the principles of the Seven Habits for Highly Effective People so they can lead themselves and others. The process is explicitly taught in Social Studies classes with interdisciplinary reinforcement in all subjects. Through the leadership process, students learn how to set and track personal, service and academic goals through leadership notebooks, drive the sustainability of the program through student and teacher Lighthouse teams and engage in service learning projects. All students September 2018-June 2019 All students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers in Grades PK-8, Student Government Coordinator, Club Leaders, Lead Teacher, Parent Coordinator, Administration Teachers in Grades PK-8, Speech Teacher, Guidance Counselors, Dean, Administration All students September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers in Grades PK-8, Guidance Counselors, Dean, Administration 2018-19 CEP 28  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent coordinator, teachers, and staff will host educational family events/activities throughout the school year.  Teachers will conduct Curriculum Orientation Conference and/or Teacher Introduction Conferences within the 1st or 2nd month of the school year introducing them to the Curriculum Map and Common Core Standards.  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will continue to encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee throughout the school year, beginning in September 2018  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will provide material and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, particularly a leveled reading book list on the SISCL website throughout the school year, beginning in September 2018.  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will support or hosting Family Day and evening events;  Parent Coordinator will establish a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will host events to support, asserting leadership in education for their children, parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will encourage more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Teachers and service providers will provide written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Parent coordinator will continue to develop and distribute a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress  Teachers will provide school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will continue SISCL Leadership Awards Ceremony as an event following every PTA meeting  Teacher Lighthouse Staff will continue to offer 7 Habits Signature Parent Training  Staff will continue to utilize a telephone messaging system that would provide parents with a prerecorded message from the principal or other administrator about upcoming events, important meetings or school emergencies  Administration and teachers will continue to offer electronic access to grades through STARS classroom and Pupil Path / Skedula.  Teachers will continue to provide electronic text message communication through Remind.com, Pupil Path, Class Dojo  PTA will continue to offer PTA Newsletter  Teachers and staff will conduct Curriculum Orientation Conference and/or Teacher Introduction Conferences within the 1st or 2nd month of the school year introducing them to the Curriculum Map and Common Core Standards. SISCL Staff and Administration will continue to develop the SISCL email system and the SISCL website to establish and maintain a reliable source of communication and outreach. In addition, in grades 6-8 the use of electronic grade books such as STARS classroom and Pupil Path / Skedula. SISCL Staff and Administration will continue to provide Material and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, particularly a leveled reading book list on the SISCL website.    Teachers and Administration will continue to hold culminating performances and/ or exhibitions of art displays and music performances. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Staff and Student Lighthouse teams will meet monthly to monitor service learning implementation and sustainability. ● Peer teacher inter-visitations to observe and learn from ongoing service learning projects. ● Time allocated for Student Government Coordinator position. ● Staff will utilize time during professional learning time on Monday during differentiated learning sessions to review and learn service learning best practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will consult with planning documents, Service Learning Trackers, and Leadership Notebooks to measure progress towards student completion of service learning projects. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Service Learning Trackers, Leadership Notebooks, Student Participation in Student Government Activities Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In cross grade, cross content team, instructional team and inquiry team meetings, we have reflected on the performance trends of our students. To maintain accuracy, we have confirmed our findings and implications using standards assessment from the Item Skills Analysis of the NY State Tests. In mathematics, the following trends were discovered during this school year and confirmed to complement the data for the students in previous testing years. We responded to the trends through instructional planning and targeted teaching. In order to meet our goal, our school has invested in targeted, math professional learning for all math teachers through Algebra for All, Core Collaborative’s Empowered ED training and will receive coaching from NTN coaches. Math impact team members will collaborate to implement new professional learning to help students increase number sense, fluency and conceptual understanding. Summary of Strengths Collaboration is a strength of our school as noted in our most recent Quality Review Report. For Quality Indicator 4.2 - Teacher Teams and Leadership Development - it was noted, "All teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations aligned to school goals to strengthen instructional capacity, and embed leadership opportunities to empower staff on key instructional decisions in the school, " which developed, "school-wide instructional coherence that fosters teachers’ ability to play an integral role in decision making that promotes the Common Core Standards resulting in increased student achievement for all learners." Our school will utilize our data trend analysis, the Framework For Great Schools and the Formative Assessment Process outlined in District 31's Core Collaborative instructional initiative to address our annual goal for collaborative teaching to meet the performance benchmark outlined in our goal below. Spring 2018 NY State Math Exam Grades 3-8 Strengths On the 2018 NY State Math Exam, the outline below represents the standards with the highest proficiency per grade:  Grade Three: 3. OA.A.1- Operations and Algebraic Thinking:Interpret products of whole numbers. Students scored in the 84%  Grade Four: 4.NF.3b:Numbers and Operations in Fractions:Decompose a fraction into a sum of fractions with the same denominator in more than one way. Students scored in the 89%  Grade Five:5 MD.C.3b: Measurement and Data: Generate two numerical patterns using two given rules. Identify apparent relationships between corresponding terms. Students scored in the 91%  Grade Six: EE.A.2c: Equations and Expressions:Write and evaluate numerical expressions involving whole number exponents. Students scored in the 80% 2018-19 CEP 31   Grade Seven: 7.SP.A.1:Statistics and Probability: Compute unit rates associated with ratios of fractions. Students scored in the 80%  Grade Eight: 8.G.2 – Geometry:Understand that a 2-dimensional figure is congruent to another if the second can be obtained from the first by a sequence of rotations, reflections, and translations. Students scored in the 86% Priority Needs On the 2018 NY State Math Exam, the outline below represents the standards with the priority needs standards with the least proficiency per grade:  Grade Three:3 MD.C.7: Measurement and Data: Measure area by counting unit squares. Students scored in the 11%  Grade Four:4 MD.B.4: Measurement and Data:Make a line plot to display a data set of measurements in fractions of a unit. Students scored in the 36%  Grade Five:5 MD.5b: Measurement and Data:Recognize volume as additive. Find volumes of solid figures composed of two non-overlapping right rectangular prisms by adding the volumes of the non-overlapping parts, applying this technique to solve real world problems. Students scored in the 29%  Grade Six:6.NS.6b: Number System:Understand signs of numbers on ordered pairs as indicating locations in quadrants of the coordinate plane. Students scored in the 28%  Grade Seven:7.NS.1c: Number System: Understand subtraction of rational numbers as adding the additive inverse. Students scored in the 23%  Grade Eight:8.F.B.5: Functions: Describe qualitatively the functional relationship between two quantities by analyzing a graph. Construct a function to model a linear relationship between two quantities. Students scored in the 29% Grades K-2 Mathematics Needs Assessment Growth Analysis K-2 Fall 2017 to Spring 2018 Math Performance Assessments Summary of Strengths Kindergarten:  OA.1-Operations and Algebraic Thinking-57% First Grade:  NBT.1.1- Numbers and Operations in Base Ten-63%  NBT.2.1-Numbers and Operations in Base Ten-55% Second Grade:  2.2.NBT.1-Numbers and Operations in Base Ten-71%  OA.2.2- Operations and Algebraic Thinking-72% 2018-19 CEP 32  Kindergarten: Priority Needs  NBTNumbers and Operations in Base Ten-42%  CC-Counting and Cardinality-49% First Grade:  OA.1.1-Operations and Algebraic Thinking-36% OA.2.2-Operations and Algebraic Thinking-48% Second Grade:  Students demonstrated an average growth over 50 percent in all standards. Summary: Based on the results of the Spring 2018 Performance Assessments, students in Kindergarten and grade two demonstrated growth in Operations and Algebraic Thinking. First and second grade also demonstrated strength in Numbers and Operations in Base Ten. Priority needs include Numbers and Operations in Base Ten and Counting and Cardinality in Kindergarten and Operations and Algebraic Thinking in Grade one . Overall growth for Kindergarten was 50 percent; grade one was 41 percent and grade two was 74 percent. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Math Impact Team members will apply new inquiry-based math fluency and conceptual understanding strategies and collaboratively analyze Fall and Spring Performance Assessments and NY State Math Exams to improve Measurement and Data, Number System and Functions skills as measured by a 2% increase of all students achieving at or above proficiency level as measured by the New York State Mathematics exam and Go Math/CMP Math Unit Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Lead Math Teachers are organized in triad models whereas three teachers are the primary teachers of two grade-specific classes allowing for co-teaching in various models including team teaching, parallel teaching, and support teaching. K-5 Math Block Daily K-5 th grade students September 2018 – June 2019 ● Students who are not measured by a standardized exam will be monitored by Go Math End of Chapter Assessments and Exemplars. Teachers will score using standard- based rubric and record progress on the Go Math Profile Sheet which will be shared with families to build family partnerships and placed in portfolios to monitor progress. Students who will be monitored by the New York State Mathematics Assessment will have the opportunity to receive small group targeted instruction to address deficiencies and accelerate in areas of rigor. Students not meeting expectation will meet in strategic groups. ● Instruction will be delivered in a workshop and inquiry model whereby the teacher models content, students practice and are released to independent or group work. At key points in the unit, teachers will also launch inquiry lessons where students will explore deep, open-ended problems with less teacher support up front. When students are called back the teacher will assess the needs of the group to plan for future teaching. The workshop will include the use of hands on learning opportunities to incorporate the necessity of concrete experiences to build abstract mathematical concepts along with the use of manipulatives at this age. ● To support the curriculum, teachers will align iPads and Smart boards, calendar routines and rituals to extend students mathematical experiences. Teachers will use the Problem of the Day. Teachers will develop appropriate Math Centers using Grab and Go. Additionally, problem-solving methodologies, i.e. Exemplars, will be introduced to the instructional model to ensure a strong foundation in problem solving skills. Performance Tasks for each mathematics strand will be designed 2018-19 CEP 34  and administered at the end of each unit throughout the year to mark student achievement. ● Differentiation of small groups by process, content, product and interest will be incorporated into regular instruction and be documented. ●Supportive technology will be incorporated into instruction when the opportunity is available. ● Student progress will monitored using multiple measures including content-strand specific portfolios with scoring rubrics; Go Math assessments and individual profiles of progress; checklists and; samples of student work. ● Unit tasks ● The Renzulli Learning Program will be used to assess student interest and learning style. This interest inventory data will be used to support differentiated instruction and enrichment opportunities. The Renzulli activity search engine will also provide students with Common Core based lessons. ● The Pathblazer RTI program by Compass Learning will be used as whole class and small group RTI support. Pathblazer engages students in pre-assessment to determine a personalized learning path of engaging, computer-based activities. The learning plan features summative and formative assessments and presents content and skills in different forms based on assessment to take advantage of student learning styles and preferences. Teachers can generate reports to monitor student outcomes and can select individual activities form the content library to use for whole class instruction with their standard daily lesson. ● Students in grade 4-5 will prepare for and compete in District 31 math tournament. 2018-19 CEP 35  ● Professional learning from Core Collaborative Math Trainer and NTN coaches will be begin in October, 2018 to build on student-centered, productive struggle math strategies with rigorous, common-core aligned tasks. ● Teachers will implement Activate, a research-based comprehensive cognitive skills training program designed to improve attention, self-control and memory, with all students in Kindergarten through grade two. The program uses a combination of computer-based training games and whole-body physical exercises to increase the Executive Function of the brain to help improve classroom performance and close the achievement gap. The program will be implemented at least 60 minutes per week in three, 20-minute sessions. Assessments will be administered through the program and teachers and administrators will receive reports demonstrating student progress. These reports will be correlated with performance data to study impact. ● Professional learning from Core Collaborative Math Trainer and NTN coaches will be begin in October 2018 to build on student-centered, productive struggle math strategies with rigorous, common-core aligned tasks. ● Teachers will continue to attend Algebra for All training in the Summer of 2018 and throughout the 2018-19 school year to strengthen student-centered, productive struggle-based math strategies with rigorous, common-core aligned tasks. 6-8 Math Block Scheduling 6-8th grade students September 2018 – June 2019 ● Students measured by the New York State Mathematics Assessment have the opportunity to receive small group targeted instruction to address deficiencies and accelerate in areas of rigor. ● Instruction will be delivered in a workshop and inquiry model whereby the teacher models content, students practice and are released to independent or group work. At key points in the unit, teachers will also launch inquiry lessons where students will explore deep, open-ended problems with less teacher support Intermediate teachers are organized in teams whereas four content-specific teachers will deliver instruction to students, which support a program where content teachers are also scheduled to service the needs of students through push-in Academic 2018-19 CEP 36 Intervention Services. up front. When students are called back the teacher will assess the needs of the group to plan for future teaching. The workshop will include the use of hands on learning opportunities to incorporate the necessity of concrete experiences to build abstract mathematical concepts along with the use of manipulatives at this age. ● The workshop/inquiry model will include the use of hands on learning opportunities when necessary to incorporate the necessity to build concrete explorations to scaffold abstract mathematical concepts for those learners who have a need. Group work will be scheduled during the math workshop and based on student progress, flexible-grouping opportunities will be provided. Students new to Impact Math will receive support of a gradual release of responsibility into the transition of new content and bridge new learning. Students in years two and three will be assisted in the transition into the next cycle. ● Scaffolding of lessons directed by math strands as well as various access points will be embedded in the lesson and will support learners and differentiate at all ability levels. Teachers will use the Problem of the day to scaffold learning. To ensure strong problem solving strategies, methodologies will be introduced, i.e. Exemplars, to address the trend of weak skills in this area. Instructional will differentiated by instructional content and process when possible to be aligned to the standards. ● Open-ended portfolio pieces for each mathematics strand will be designed and administered at least two times throughout the year to mark student achievement. ● Differentiated activities correlating to the various CCLS mathematics strands will be designed and administered throughout the year to also move student achievement. Furthermore, cross-curricular infusions will include literature connections and use of Foldables and Organizers. ● Technology and digital learning will be incorporated in planning and lesson delivery through the use of Smart Boards and document cameras, Texas Instrument technologies. 2018-19 CEP 37  ● Student progress will be monitored using multiple measures including Schoolnet Baseline and Benchmark Assessments and performance assessments; Common Core Tasks Impact- generated performance-based assessments and chapter tests; teacher-made quizzes; journal entries; self-reflections and test-taking practice; progress reports; report cards ● The Renzulli Learning Program will be used to assess student interest and learning style. This interest inventory data will be used to support differentiated instruction and enrichment opportunities. The Renzulli activity search engine will also provide students with Common Core based lessons and resources.● Students in grade 6-8 will prepare for and compete in District 31 Middle School math tournament. ● Professional learning from Core Collaborative Math Trainer and NTN coaches will be begin in October 2018 to build on student-centered, productive struggle math strategies with rigorous, common-core aligned tasks. ● Teachers will continue to attend Algebra for All training in the Summer of 2018 and throughout the 2018-19 school year to strengthen student-centered, productive struggle-based math strategies with rigorous, common-core aligned tasks. ● College Access for All program will continue to support the college going culture for students throughout the building – with a focus on seventh grade students. Additional school-wide curriculum will be distributed in September 2018 to help all teachers supplement their lessons with college-awareness lessons. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent coordinator, teachers, and staff will host educational family events/activities throughout the school year. 2018-19 CEP 38   Teachers will conduct Curriculum Orientation Conference and/or Teacher Introduction Conferences within the 1st or 2nd month of the school year introducing them to the Curriculum Map and Common Core Standards.  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will continue to encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee throughout the school year, beginning in September 2018  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will provide material and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, particularly a leveled reading book list on the SISCL website throughout the school year, beginning in September 2018.  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will support or hosting Family Day and evening events;  Parent Coordinator will establish a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will host events to support, asserting leadership in education for their children, parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will encourage more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Teachers and service providers will provide written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Parent coordinator will continue to develop and distribute a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress  Teachers will provide school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will continue SISCL Leadership Awards Ceremony as an event following every PTA meeting  Teacher Lighthouse Staff will continue to offer 7 Habits Signature Parent Training  Staff will continue to utilize a telephone messaging system that would provide parents with a prerecorded message from the principal or other administrator about upcoming events, important meetings or school emergencies  Administration and teachers will continue to offer electronic access to grades through STARS classroom and Pupil Path / Skedula.  Teachers will continue to provide electronic text message communication through Remind.com, Pupil Path, Class Dojo  PTA will continue to offer PTA Newsletter  Teachers and staff will conduct Curriculum Orientation Conference and/or Teacher Introduction Conferences within the 1st or 2nd month of the school year introducing them to the Curriculum Map and Common Core Standards. SISCL Staff and Administration will continue to develop the SISCL email system and the SISCL website to establish and maintain a reliable source of communication and outreach. In addition, in grades 6-8 the use of electronic grade books such as STARS classroom and Pupil Path / Skedula. SISCL Staff and Administration will continue to provide Material and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, particularly a leveled reading book list on the SISCL website.    Teachers and Administration will continue to hold culminating performances and/ or exhibitions of art displays and music performances. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● The vertical “goal buddies” Math Team will meet weekly to interact and plan more inter-class visitations with focus on teaching and learning. This time is built into the school program allowing for regular meetings and inter-visitations. 2018-19 CEP 39  ● Instructional resources include CMP3 Math/Go Math and manipulatives, Texas Instrument equipment, and technological equipment. ● On-going Partnerships with the College of Staten Island will continue to support content areas. ● Lead Math Teachers are organized in triad models whereas three teachers are the primary teachers of two grade-specific classes allowing for co-teaching in various models including team teaching, parallel teaching, and support teaching. ● SISCL has invested in a Peer Collaborative teacher who will support teaching staff through classroom labs, surveys, citywide instruction expectations based PD opportunities and differentiated Professional Learning sessions. ● Instruction in grades K-5 will be delivered in a workshop model whereby the teacher models content; students practice and are released to independent or group work. Students in grades 6-8 will have the opportunity to receive small group targeted instruction to address deficiencies and accelerate in areas of rigor. When students are called back the teacher will assess the needs of the group to plan for future teaching. The workshop will include the use of hands on learning opportunities to incorporate the necessity of concrete experiences to build abstract mathematical concepts along with the use of manipulatives at this age Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● In Fall 2018 and Spring 2019, student progress will be monitored for growth using Schoolnet Performance Assessments. ● Each month in 2018 and 2019, Common Core Tasks and teacher-generated performance-based assessments and chapter tests; ● Each week, in 2018 and 2019 teacher-made quizzes; journal entries; self-reflections and test-taking practice; progress reports; report cards ● Each month in 2018 and 2019, students who are not measured by a standardized exam will be monitored by Go Math End of Chapter Assessments and Exemplars. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 40   Go Math End of Chapter Assessments   Schoolnet Baseline and Benchmark Assessments Schoolnet Performance Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As the Danielson Framework states in its description of component 3D, Using Assessment in Instruction, “Assessment of student learning plays an important new role in teaching: no longer signaling the end of instruction, it is now recognized to be an integral part of instruction, increasing teacher’s capacity to “have a “finger on the pulse” of a lesson, monitoring student understanding and, where feedback is appropriate, offering it to students,” it is a vital goal of our School Leadership and a key focus of our Professional Learning Focus through The Formative Assessment Process. In the 2017-18 school year, 70 percent of all component 3D ADVANCE ratings resulted in an “Effective” rating and 9 percent resulted in an “Developing” rating in component 3D, according to our Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) ADVANCE evaluation report. Twenty percent component 3D ADVANCE ratings were “Highly Effective,” and one percent were “Ineffective.” As component 1E, Designing Coherent Instruction, plays a critical role in the preparation process to design effective checks for understanding and formative assessments, school leaders will closely support teachers and analyze data in this area to ensure lesson plans, curriculum maps and unit plans and rigorous tasks include all the necessary components to support the 3D Indicator. In the 2017-18 school year, 71 percent of all component 1E ADVANCE ratings resulted in an “Effective” rating and 9 percent resulted in an “Developing” rating in component 1E, according to our Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) ADVANCE evaluation report. Nineteen percent component 3D ADVANCE ratings were “Highly Effective,” and one percent were “Ineffective.” Strengths in 3D, Using Assessment in Instruction Strategies ● 20 percent of all component 3D ADVANCE ratings resulted in an “Highly Effective” rating Next Steps in 3D, Using Assessment in Instruction Strategies ● 70 percent of all component 3B ADVANCE ratings resulted in an “Effective” rating ● 9 percent of all component 3D ADVANCE ratings resulted in an “Developing” rating and 1% “Ineffective” Strengths in 1E, Designing Coherent Instruction ● 19 percent of all component 1E ADVANCE ratings resulted in an “Highly Effective” rating Next Steps in 1E, Designing Coherent Instruction ● 71 percent of all component 1E ADVANCE ratings resulted in an “Effective” rating ● 9 percent of all component 1E ADVANCE ratings resulted in an “Developing” rating and 1% “Ineffective” 2018-19 CEP 42  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will create and implement a professional learning cycle that builds teachers’ capacity to design and implement assessment in instruction strategies with all students, resulting in a 2% increase in all Effective and Highly Effective ratings for components 1E and 3D, in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 43 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Pre K- Grade 8 Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 School Administration, Lead Teacher, Grade and Triad Team Members Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). As a result of the data compiled from the Professional Learning Survey and to deepen teaching and learning at SISCL, we have enhanced our Professional Learning Inquiry Cycle with elements that will empower teachers to work in grade-subject Impact Teams to customize their own professional learning. This year, teachers will have greater flexibility to discuss, practice, and adjust to new professional learning focus topics and analyze their implications on student performance at a pace that is most comfortable for each team. Like last year, this format will give us a chance to be introduced to a new topic, practice it in our classrooms, and engage in an action research inquiry protocol that will enable us to not only discuss implementation ideas and experiences, but to see them in action in colleagues’ content area classroom through a Peer Focus Visit Protocol. In addition, this inquiry process will provide ample opportunities to analyze the effects of our focus on student work and data in both content and inter-disciplinary teams, make adjustments, and create next steps and implications for future instruction. We will begin our first cycle with teachers in grades 6-8. Teachers in Pre K-5th grade will begin the cycle the following week. Please note the outline below for more detail regarding the eight-week cycle, the protocols, responsibilities and the opportunities a flexible professional learning schedule provides. As SISCL continues to implement the Formative Assessment Process, questioning and discussion techniques will be naturally embedded into new Professional Learning Inquiry Foci. 2018-19 CEP 44  Week One: Whole Group Focus Introduction to pedagogical strategy. Weeks Two through Ten During weeks two through seven, teachers will work through their Co-constructed Professional Learning Plan. Teachers will adhere to their co-constructed scheduled time during these six weeks to meet with: Impact Teams (Grade / Content)   Vertical – Content Teams  Triad / Grade-level Interdisciplinary Teams to  discuss, share best practices and develop strategies  around the inquiry cycle focus research and develop tools, strategies, and protocols to use to implement the inquiry cycle focus and impact student achievement  plan and debrief visits to colleagues’ classrooms  select and analyze student work and performance data using the Quantitative Data Analysis and Learning from Student Work Protocols  prepare a presentation of data, insights, reflection, and work products developed during the cycle to be presented to colleagues during Week 8 of the cycle Meetings and Protocols Impact Team Meetings Impact Teams, grade-content partners, will meet to discuss implementation and develop strategies to overcome any hurdles that arise. This will be an opportunity to plan how the strategy will work with different standards, skills and projects. Also during this time, teachers may plan a Peer Focus Visit utilizing the Peer Focus Visit Protocol and Planning Form. Impact Teams will set the schedule for focus implementation, collaborate with other Impact Teams to coordinate vertical content team meetings and choose pre and post assessments for data analysis. In addition to 2018-19 CEP 45  Learning from Student Work in interdisciplinary content teams, Impact Teams may look at student work together as well. Vertical Content Area Team Meetings Vertical Content Team meetings will provide the opportunity to confer with content area experts and discuss the experiences teachers had, both implementing, and analyzing the effects of our Professional Learning Focus. Teachers will share content based strategies that had the most impact on student learning, analyze the effect on student work and data, and plan content based data driven next steps. Grade-Level Interdisciplinary Meetings and the Learning From Student Work” Protocol At one or more points during the cycle, teachers will come together in their grade or triad teams to engage in a comprehensive “Learning From Student Work” process. These meetings will also allow teachers to discuss implementation across subject areas in the same grade, create interdisciplinary activities for students, share data and possible adjustments and enhancements for future planning. Please note, the Learning From Student Work Protocol can also be completed during Impact and Vertical Team meetings. SISCL’s Quantitative Data Analysis Protocol To measure the efficacy of focus implementation, Impact Teams will complete the SISCL Quantitative Data Analysis Protocol at key points during the cycle. The protocol will facilitate rich discussions, allow teachers to uncover surprises and take data driven next steps in their planning. During the protocol teachers will move through four phases during a 45 – 90-minute session. Teacher teams will create a learning intention explaining what the data is measuring; describe and make quantitative observations about the data; infer and interpret the data making note of trends and drawing conclusions. Finally, Impact Teams will create next steps – strategies to address the implications of the data Weeks Nine and Ten: Celebration, Discussion and Next Steps 2018-19 CEP 46 To complete our Professional Learning Inquiry, teachers will return to a whole group week to share back their work, tools and experiences from the last six weeks of their co-constructed professional learning cycle. Impact teams are expected to bring specific examples of implementation challenges and successes, tools developed, vertical planning outcomes, peer visiting influences on instruction, and effects of the strategy on student performance, which will be present in the following documents:  Professional Learning Cycle Impact Team Success Criteria  Example(s) of Assessments Used  Example(s) of Pedagogical Approaches Used    SISCL Quantitative Data Analysis Form(s) SISCL’s Learning from Student Work Form(s) SISCL’s Inter-visitation Form and Note-catcher Presentations will be set up by each Impact Team in a gallery around the meeting room. We will end our professional learning cycle inquiry with time to formally share and celebrate our experiences during the gallery walk and discussion. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Staten Island School of Civic Leadership engages parents in multiple daytime and evening events and special activities including curriculum nights where content and instructional practices are communicated. This year's focus on Effective School Leadership to improve Danielson Components 1E and 3D For example, at these events, teachers would communicate how to use discussion prompts which parents could use to practice and reinforce with their children at home. Key events, staff members and important dates are listed below:  Parent coordinator, teachers, and staff will host educational family events/activities throughout the school year.  Teachers will conduct Curriculum Orientation Conference and/or Teacher Introduction Conferences within the 1st or 2nd month of the school year introducing them to the Curriculum Map and Common Core Standards.  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will continue to encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee throughout the school year, beginning in September 2018 2018-19 CEP 47   Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will provide material and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, particularly a leveled reading book list on the SISCL website throughout the school year, beginning in September 2018.  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will support or hosting Family Day and evening events;  Parent Coordinator will establish a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will host events to support, asserting leadership in education for their children, parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will encourage more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Teachers and service providers will provide written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Parent coordinator will continue to develop and distribute a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress  Teachers will provide school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will continue SISCL Leadership Awards Ceremony as an event following every PTA meeting  Teacher Lighthouse Staff will continue to offer 7 Habits Signature Parent Training  Staff will continue to utilize a telephone messaging system that would provide parents with a prerecorded message from the principal or other administrator about upcoming events, important meetings or school emergencies  Administration and teachers will continue to offer electronic access to grades through STARS classroom and Pupil Path / Skedula.  Teachers will continue to provide electronic text message communication through Remind.com, Pupil Path, Class Dojo  PTA will continue to offer PTA Newsletter  Teachers and staff will conduct Curriculum Orientation Conference and/or Teacher Introduction Conferences within the 1st or 2nd month of the school year introducing them to the Curriculum Map and Common Core Standards. SISCL Staff and Administration will continue to develop the SISCL email system and the SISCL website to establish and maintain a reliable source of communication and outreach. In addition, in grades 6-8 the use of electronic grade books such as STARS classroom and Pupil Path / Skedula. SISCL Staff and Administration will continue to provide Material and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, particularly a leveled reading book list on the SISCL website.    Teachers and Administration will continue to hold culminating performances and/ or exhibitions of art displays and music performances. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● SISCL has invested in a Peer Collaborative teacher who supports teaching staff through classroom labs, surveys, citywide instruction expectations based PD opportunities and differentiated Professional Developments ● ADVANCE-driven inter-visitations of teachers rated “Effective and Highly Effective” ● Utilize strategies such as growth mindset, questioning and discussion and productive struggle to increase student engagement and encourage them to task academic risks. 2018-19 CEP 48  ● Staff will utilize 90-minutes of professional learning time every Monday to implement the Professional Learning Cycle. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the conclusion of Advance Observation cycles in Fall, Winter and Spring, Advance dashboard reporting tools will be used to measure teacher attainment of effective and highly effective ratings in Component 1E and 3D. At the conclusion of each 10-week profession learning cycles, progress will also be monitored towards completing our goal using the following assessment tools: ● Professional Learning Observation Reflection forms ● Student work analyzed during Session Five of the Professional Learning Cycle ● Instructional Cabinet Discussions and Reflections from ADVANCE observation sessions Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE Observation Dashboard Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 49  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To create a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school, our school has heavily invested in our Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) program utilizing resources from the school community through developed partnerships with businesses and community-based organizations. These efforts create a warm environment where the community understands and values how we welcome their partnerships as well as the civic mission of providing their children with 21st century college and career skills. We measure progress towards these goals using data from the School Quality report as well as academic progress in the science subjects. 2017-18 School Quality Report Framework Elements Scores for Strong Family and Community Ties Strengths Teacher outreach to parents – Positive Survey Response from teachers and parents– 95 percent Parent and community engagement is high when the school community hosts events which highlight student work, performances, and feature parent-student learning partnerships. 2017-18 Quality Review Indicator 3.4 – “How effectively does the school partner with families to support student success?” was a Well-Developed Area of Celebration.” Priority Needs Our lowest indicator for the 2017-18 School Quality Report – Framework Elements Scores for Strong Family and Community Ties – is Parent Involvement in Schools with 91 percent positive survey results. This indicator has grown two percent in the last two years and is a point above the district average and two points above the city average. Parent involvement in schools - Positive Survey Response Parents – 91 percent Parent and community engagement is lower for workshops and non-student-based meetings. Spring 2018 NYS Science Test Grade 4 • Level 4: 81% 2018-19 CEP 50  • Level 3: 17% • Level 2: 1% • Level 1: 1% Grade 8 • Level 4: 28% • Level 3: 53% • Level 2: 17% • Level 1: 2% Summary: In Grade 4, 98% of our students received either a Level 3 or 4. In Grade 8, 81% of our students received either a level 3 or 4. Grade 8 went up 8% from last year. 2017-2018 Science Performance Strengths Comparison of Performance Assessments in Science (Fall and Spring 2017-2018) Grade 6 • LA LA.6-8-RST-Integration of Knowledge and Ideas- Overall Science scores for the grade went from 24% to76% (52% increase) Grade 7 • LA.6-8-RST-Integration of Knowledge and Ideas- Overall Science scores for the grade went from 28% to 68% (41% increase) • LA.6-8-WHST-Writing- Scores went from 33% - 76 %(43% increase) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leadership and horizontal and vertical Science and Math teacher teams will continue to build and sustain our Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) program utilizing resources from the school community through developed partnerships with businesses and community based organizations, resulting in a 2.5% increase of students achieving at or above proficiency level on the fourth and eighth grade New York State Science exam and sixth and seventh grade Science Performance Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Visionmaker NYC Partnership with Wildlife Conservation Society 6-8th grade students September 2018 – June 2019 6-8th grade teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator To engage our students in interdisciplinary science, technology, engineering and math projects that will help prepare them for 21st century careers, all students in the sixth grade will participate in an initiative called Visionmaker NYC. Formally known as Manahatta2409, this project, made possible through a partnership with the Wildlife Conservation Society, takes students 400 years into the past to look at the ecosystems in all five boroughs of NYC when they were occupied by the Lenape Indians. Next, it asks them to compare and contrast that island to the present and allows them to create visions for the future. While learning about biodiversity, water and carbon cycles, and population trends, students will work with a computer model to manipulate variables as they create a city of the future. Primary instruction for all four sixth grade classes will take place in Ms. Reier’s science class and will be supported with interdisciplinary connections in social studies, math and ELA. To allow students to work in an intimate learning environment, five students from each class will meet in the library during AM period to dig deeper into their models and work out challenging math simulations. They will also engage in rich discussions based on a weekly scientific journal article that will be assigned every Friday. Software Engineering Program Jr. (SEP Jr.) Partnership The SEP Jr. program, which is brand-new for the 2016-17 school year, is the first school-wide elementary-school computer science program in New York City. Teacher teams in grades K ,1 ,2 and 5 will introduce students to fundamental computer science topics, focusing on computer science as a tool for creative expression and problem solving. Kindergarten – 5th grade students September 2018 – June 2019 6-8th grade teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator, NYCID Director 2018-19 CEP 52  FIRST Lego Robotics – Partnership with NYCID During the fall and winter months, sixth, seventh and eighth grade students will work as a team to build a Lego robot, learn programming skills, and work with different sensors that allow the robot to understand where it is on a competition game board. Once the robot is built, students will train for the Staten Island borough qualifying competition, which takes place in January. If the team earns enough points, they will move on to the city championship at the Jacob Javits Center on March 14, 2015 Urban Advantage Partnership To enrich and support curriculum and instruction of our Science and STEM program, SISCL has joined Urban Advantage (UA) as a partner school for the 2016-17 school year. Urban Advantage is standards-based partnership program designed to improve students’ understanding of scientific inquiry through collaborations between urban public school systems and science cultural institutions such as zoos, botanical gardens, museums, and science centers. Traditionally a middle school program for the last 11 years, we are excited to join Urban Advantage’s new elementary pilot program, allowing us to add select science teachers from grades 3 – 5. Urban Advantage will provide 3rd-8th grade science teachers with 40 hours of professional development and classroom supplies including a lighted plant-growing environment with a self-watering seedling system and plant curriculum, digital cameras, a dissecting microscope, stopwatches, magnifying glasses, rock collections, field guides, and kits for studying DNA and designing rockets. With this training and materials, middle school science teachers and students will engage in scientific inquiry and authentic investigations. To round out the program, SISCL teachers, students and families will also receive vouchers for free field trips and family visits. The field trips will generate ideas for science projects, and the voucher program enables students to return multiple times to collect data for their investigations and become familiar with the institution. iLearn Blended Learning Regents Program 6-8th grade students September 2018 – June 2019 6-8th grade teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator, NYCID Director 3-8th grade students September 2018 – June 2019 6-8th grade teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator 8th grade students October 2018 – June 2019 8th grade teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 53  The iLearn program at SISCL is committed to preparing students for success in K-12, college and career by personalizing learning to the individual needs, motivations and strengths of each child. Utilizing a blended learning curriculum and iLearn platform, eighth grade students will have the opportunity to take ninth grade Regents courses alongside their peers during their 8th grade classes and receive continued support during AM and lunch periods. The iLearn program makes this blended experience possible by adopting a variety of strategies to help schools personalize and deepen the learning experience of each student. Invention Convention 5th Grade STEM Initiative – Partnership with Local Engineers 5th grade students November 2018 – June 2019 5th grade teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator Utilizing design process strategies from Professional Learning from Cooper Hewitt and the NYCDOE STEM Institute, fifth grade students will follow an inquiry design cycle where they identify a problem and then research, study, design and improve an invention to create a solution. The program will culminate in an Invention Convention for teachers, students, and parents. Local engineers will also speak to students at the convention. MOUSE Squad - Partnership with MOUSE.org As MOUSE Squad members, sixth through eighth grade students work with a faculty advisor to ensure SISCL’s technology infrastructure is up and running and design and produce the Lighthouse Live: Leaders Light the Way video series. In addition, students explore computing, electronics, games, design and more, and educators can easily tailor Mouse’s content to suit their goals as well as the vision of their school, community center, or afterschool program. MOUSE’s purpose-driven content helps students develop the technical, problem-solving and leadership skills necessary to harness the power of technology as a force for good. Coding through Codesters and Code.org In our sixth to eighth grade special education math classes, students will continue to use the Codesters program to understand the coordinate grid for calculating distance, executing translations, and building critical thinking, logic, and problem solving skills that are directly transferred to support persistence in traditional math applications. Code.org is a cornerstone curriculum component in the SEP Jr. program described above. The program teaches elementary 6-8th grade students October 2018 – June 2019 MOUSE Squad Faculty Advisor, Administration 6-8th grade math and science teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator K - 2, 5th grade students December 2018 – June 2019 6-8th grade students, SWD 2018-19 CEP 54  school students computational and critical thinking skills as well as how to code using a block-based programming language. In sixth and seventh grade, math and science, teachers will StarLogo Nova through the Code.org curriculum to create simulations that study the transfer of energy in ecosystems, weather patterns in the different layers of the atmosphere as well as an ethogram study to test and record turtle movement in animal science. Computer Science for All – Physical Computing Class Grade 6-8 Students in grades 6-8 will have the opportunity to take part in a new computer science course, Introduction to Physical Computing. This 54-hour long introductory computer science course guides students to explore fundamental CS concepts through tinkering with the micro:bit, a simple programmable computer device. Each unit of the course guides students through the learning process with three practices: analyzing computer applications around them based on a given issue; prototyping a project that reflects the result of the analysis plus their interest; and communicating about their projects, including the functionality of a project, a project development process, influence from other projects and their contribution to a project when working in a group. The curriculum and support sessions assist educators in discovering the most effective way of facilitating this course for their own classroom, while helping them to become comfortable with the main tool, the micro:bit. A+ Mobile STEM Carts Grades PreK – 12A+ Mobile STEM Carts give students hands-on opportunities to work with scientific probes, data loggers and engineering equipment. These tools include, state of the art presentation equipment, data management tools, science tools and Robotics and Engineering Kits. These carts will enhance math and science instruction and offere additional STEM opportunities for all students. September 2018 – June 2019 STEM teacher and science teacher, Administration, Parent Coordinator Grades Pre K – 8 September 2018 – June 2019 Math and Science Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator September 2018 – June 2019 Science teachers, Administration, Lead Science Turn-Key Trainers Amplify Science Curriculum Grades K-5 To meet the demands of the new NYCDOE Science Scope and Sequence as well as the Next Generation Science Standards, teachers will study and add the Amplify Science Program to their Curriculum maps and unit plans. Through Amplify, teachers will engage students in inquiry and literary-based science experiences where they will discover new science phenomena, learn disciplinary core ideas and demonstrate knowledge through science and engineering performance practices. Lead science teachers were trained in the Summer of 2018 and will continue to turn-key the program during professional learning sessions and impact team meetings. 2018-19 CEP 55  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will host educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and PTA meetings throughout the school year;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee throughout the year  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will support or hosting Family Day and evening events;  Parent Coordinator will establish a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will host events to support, asserting leadership in education for their children, parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will encourage more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Teachers and service providers will provide written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Parent coordinator will continue to develop and distribute a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress  Teachers will provide school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand;  Parent coordinator, teachers, and administration will continue SISCL Leadership Awards Ceremony as an event following every PTA meeting  Teacher Lighthouse Staff will continue to offer 7 Habits Signature Parent Training  Staff will continue to utilize a telephone messaging system that would provide parents with a prerecorded message from the principal or other administrator about upcoming events, important meetings or school emergencies  Administration and teachers will continue to offer electronic access to grades through STARS classroom and Pupil Path / Skedula.  Teachers will continue to provide electronic text message communication through Remind.com, Pupil Path, Class Dojo  PTA will continue to offer PTA Newsletter  Teachers and staff will conduct Curriculum Orientation Conference and/or Teacher Introduction Conferences within the 1st or 2nd month of the school year introducing them to the Curriculum Map and Common Core Standards. SISCL Staff and Administration will continue to develop the SISCL email system and the SISCL website to establish and maintain a reliable source of communication and outreach. In addition, in grades 6-8 the use of electronic grade books such as stars classroom and Pupil Path / Skedula. SISCL Staff and Administration will continue to provide Material and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, particularly a leveled reading book list on the SISCL website.    Teachers and Administration will continue to hold culminating performances and/ or exhibitions of art displays and music performances. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Visionmaker NYC Partnership with Wildlife Conservation Society: Off-site professional learning opportunities for STEM teachers. Expenditures include per-diem substitute coverages and purchase of coaching and guest speakers. 2018-19 CEP 56  FIRST Lego Robotics Partnership with NYCID: Membership fees, equipment and event registration fees are provided by NYCID. Urban Advantage: Select teachers in grades three through eight receive from Urban Advantage $500 for additional supplies and training rate pay for weekend professional development. MOUSE Squad: Per-diem substitute coverage for off-site professional learning. MOUSE program subscription fees are funded through Councilmatic funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In Spring 2019, students will complete 4th and 8th grade NY State Science Test, to monitor progress towards a 2.5 percent increase in proficiency. At the release of the updated School Quality Report Data for Strong Family-Community Ties, school administration will monitor for growth to support continued monitoring of the affect community partnerships have on our school environment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC Science Performance Tasks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 57  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) RTI Progress Monitoring: Teachers will receive a progress monitoring spreadsheet for each class that they provide tier 2 and 3 academic intervention services and/ or enrichment to. Lists should be maintained as needed in 6 – 8 week cycles. Teachers will track the starting and ending date of each cycle of remediation or enrichment, as well as the research based strategy or program they are using and the skill they are addressing. At the end of each cycle, each individual student’s’ progress should be assessed and updated in the “Progress – Status” Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day Three 45 minute periods per week are dedicated to explicit instruction in ELA Tier II, aligned with the indicated needs of the learners, small group Tier III more intensive one to one minute- 1:3 ratio maximum five times per week in cycles. ELAAcademic Intervention Services will include At Risk students: AISinELAis being implemented in several different ways: 1. Differentiate instruction in all ELA classes via Tier I and II Intervention such as data-driven small group instruction, Fundations, Reading Reform, Wilson 2. Through frequent monitoring, evaluation of the effectiveness of Tier I and II Intervention. Students not benefiting from a Tier I and II intervention will have a change of service/ strategy until effective strategies are identified for each learner.i.e, 2018-19 CEP 58  Mathematics column using the following codes: M - Mastery NM – Non-Mastery A – Approaching Mastery E – Enrichment Spreadsheets will be maintained in each RTI folder (to be provided) and regularly updated for each child. This will be the vehicle whereby we will progress monitor each child. In addition, please supply the spreadsheets as evidence to the Pupil Progress Team (PPT) when referrals are requested. Pathblazer (K-5) computer-based intervention programs will be used by classroom AIS teachers to determine content and skill gaps, develop a personalized learning path and monitor for results using embedded formative and summative assessments. RTIProgress Monitoring: Teachers will receive a progress monitoring spreadsheet for each class that they provide tier 2 and 3 academic Leveled Tier II and III interventions, Fundations,Wilson, Reading Reform, Wonder Resources, Ready Gen (Phonics Kit), N.Y. Public Library, Wonders(leveled readers), Raz-Kids, myON, Renzulli, iPads 3. Grades 3-8 AIS Grouping 4. DRP Assessment 5. MSQI Word Generation 6. Benchmark / Periodic 3-8 7.NYC Performance Assessments 8. Baseline Assessment Adaptive, computer-based games, simulations and videos. During the school day Mathematics Academic Intervention Services will include: AIS in Mathematics is being implemented in several different ways: 1. In general education, three 45 minute periods per week, including Math Clubs, is dedicated to explicit teaching of math instruction aligned with the 2018-19 CEP 59  indicated needs of the learners. 2. Small group 3. IXL Differentiate instruction in math workshops through Tier I Intervention. Through frequent monitoring the effectiveness of Tier I interventions will be determined. Students not benefiting from a Tier I intervention will have a change of service/ strategy until effective strategies are identified for each learner, i.e. Math Targeted Intervention Program by TCM Adaptive, computer-based games, simulations and videos. intervention services and/ or enrichment to. Lists should be maintained as needed in 6 – 8 week cycles. Teachers will track the starting and ending date of each cycle of remediation or enrichment, as well as the research based strategy or program they are using and the skill they are addressing. At the end of each cycle, each individual student’s’ progress should be assessed and updated in the “Progress – Status” column using the following codes: M - Mastery NM – Non-Mastery A – Approaching Mastery E – Enrichment Spreadsheets will be maintained in eachRTIfolder (to be provided) and regularly updated for each child. This will be the vehicle whereby we will progress monitor each child. In addition, please supply the spreadsheets as evidence to the Pupil Progress Team (PPT) when referrals are requested. 2018-19 CEP 60  Science Pathblazer (K-5) computer-based intervention programs will be used by classroom AIS teachers to determine content and skill gaps, develop a personalized learning path and monitor for results using embedded formative and summative assessments. RTIProgress Monitoring: Teachers will receive a progress monitoring spreadsheet for each class that they provide tier 2 and 3 academic intervention services and/ or enrichment to. Lists should be maintained as needed in 6 – 8 week cycles. Teachers will track the starting and ending date of each cycle of remediation or enrichment, as well as the research based strategy or program they are using and the skill they are addressing. At the end of each cycle, each individual student’s’ progress should be assessed and updated in the During the school day In addition to the State mandated periods of science instruction, students will receive an additional 45 minute period of AIS instruction in science per week. Science Academic Intervention Services will include The science lab will be used as a vehicle to provide AIS instruction through small guided groups will be tailored to meet the specific needs of each student. Recommendations- Modify worksheets, give models(step by step) and visuals 2018-19 CEP 61  Social Studies “Progress – Status” column using the following codes: M - Mastery NM – Non-Mastery A – Approaching Mastery E – Enrichment Spreadsheets will be maintained in eachRTIfolder (to be provided) and regularly updated for each child. This will be the vehicle whereby we will progress monitor each child. In addition, please supply the spreadsheets as evidence to the Pupil Progress Team (PPT) when referrals are requested. RTIProgress Monitoring: Teachers will receive a progress monitoring spreadsheet for each class that they provide tier 2 and 3 academic intervention services and/ or enrichment to. Lists should be maintained as needed in 6 – 8 week cycles. During the school day In addition to the State mandated periods of social studies instruction students will receive an additional 45 minute period of AIS instruction in social studies per week. Small Group Social Studies Academic Intervention Services include: 1. The additional AIS period of social studies instruction through small guided groups will be tailored to meet the specific needs of each student. 2. Pre-determined vocabulary-List before new chapter of study Teachers will track the starting and ending date of each cycle of remediation or enrichment, as well as the research 2018-19 CEP 62  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) based strategy or program they are using and the skill they are addressing. At the end of each cycle, each individual student’s’ progress should be assessed and updated in the “Progress – Status” column using the following codes: M - Mastery NM – Non-Mastery A – Approaching Mastery E – Enrichment Spreadsheets will be maintained in eachRTIfolder (to be provided) and regularly updated for each child. This will be the vehicle whereby we will progress monitor each child. In addition, please supply the spreadsheets as evidence to the Pupil Progress Team (PPT) when referrals are requested. Students will be referred to At-Risk services as a result of teacher observation and referral. Recommendation of guidance counselors, Dean of Student Support, Administration. Small group During the school day School guidance counselors will provide individual and group guidance and crisis counseling services during the school day, one period a week or more frequently when needed. This service is offered in English and Spanish. Students are assisted in learning to deal with various personal 2018-19 CEP 63  As a result of PPT meetings and assessments. issues including schools, friends, family, current events, etc. The School Psychologist will offer clinical services agency referrals and educational, social and personal services during the school day on an as needed basis to at risk students including students in the LEP, Black, Hispanic and economically disadvantaged subgroups. This service will identify emotional, social, neurological factors that impede on student performance and provide prescriptive measures that address student needs by suggesting additional student support services. Social Workers will provide counseling services to at risk students especially students in the targeted subgroups of LEP, Black, Hispanic and Economically Disadvantaged and their families during the school day, one period a week or more frequently if needed. Students are assisted in learning how to deal with various personal and family issues that are 2018-19 CEP 64  adversely affecting student progress Health related services are offered during the school day, one period a week or as needed to all students. Students are assisted in learning how to cope with health related issues such as obesity, diabetes, asthma, etc. obesity, diabetes, asthma, etc. 2018-19 CEP 65  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 44 students  At-risk guidance counseling School supplies   Transportation  AIS support    Coordination with outside community agencies Family outreach Special arrangements for accommodations for holidays Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). .N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 66  .N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. .N/A 2018-19 CEP 67  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teaching candidates are hired centrally by the NYCDOE. As described in the NYCDOE Consolidated Application, this process ensures that all NYCDOE teachers meet State eligibility requirements. Schools, in turn, ensure that teachers are HQT, as defined by NCLB 1. All recruited teachers will be appropriately certified and highly qualified ELA and/or special education teachers, with some limited flexibility, consistent with State regulations. 2. Principal will work closely with the Network Director of Human Resources will follow the policies set forth by the DOE to ensure that the selection of highly qualified teachers follows the guidelines set by the NYS Education Department. 3. Mentors are assigned to support struggling and un-qualified teachers. 4. Professional development will target the assessed pedagogical needs of the staff with differentiated high quality professional development. Professional development will take place on days as prescribed by the DOE guidelines and Chancellor’s designated Conference Days. 5. Professional development will be on-going during a four-week professional learning cycle. In collaboration with the Professional Learning Team, teachers will be introduced to a new topic each month and have the opportunity to work with interdisciplinary and vertical team members to practice the professional learning topic, discuss its content area implications and effect on student achievement through the Learning From Student Work Protocol. 6. The Principal, in collaboration with the Borough Field Support Center’s Resources, will work to identify qualified teachers through major recruitment campaigns, hiring halls and through relationships with Colleges and Universities. 7. Interview process is done in collaboration with Administration and Teachers 8. Pupil Personnel secretary works closely with the Network HR person to ensure that any non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. Data-driven and rigorous curriculum planning and mapping aligned to the CCSS as well as reviewing trends in student work and assessments in teams along with support service teachers will be scheduled. 2018-19 CEP 68  2. In our Instructional Team meetings and our grade level meetings where common themes, i.e., unit studies, author studies, assemblies, grade projects, trips and special events are discussed and planned collaboratively. As a school wide goal we have dedicated our efforts to looking at student work collaboratively using common rubrics that are aligned to the CCSS. We have also used our grade meetings to focus on new initiatives and programs i.e.,CCSS, looking at student work, performance tasks, assessment portfolios, the writing process, promotional standards and criteria and new curriculum initiatives. A Pupil Personnel Team meets weekly to address the needs of struggling students. 3. At SISCL we encourage and promote the role of “teachers as leaders” by creating a school culture in which the staff takes the initiative to meet the Common Core State Standards by select teachers using Scholastic Code X, and collaborating on developing plans and programs to benefit the school community. 4. Teachers have taken the initiative to access professional development opportunities on their own and have been encouraged and supported to pursue those interests both with time, payment and professional books to enhance their learning. The only condition is to share their experiences with their colleagues. Inquiry Learning Communities have been at the heart of our staff development efforts. The alignment of programming and support of professional development opportunities for the staff has been implemented through the SBO process. Lead teachers differentiate Professional Development through surveys, class labs, lunch and learns, and one to one meetings. Lead teachers support teaching staff through classroom labs, surveys, citywide instruction expectations based PD opportunities and differentiated Professional Developments. 5. Professional Learning will be developed through consultation with the Professional Learning Committee. 6. Professional Learning will be delivered in cycles. Teachers will be introduced to a new topic and will be given an opportunity to meet in vertical and interdisciplinary groups to discuss the topic’s implications on planning and impact on student outcomes. The cycle will end with a whole school group discussion and reflection. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. .N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). .N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 CEP 69  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 1. Parent Involvement: There are workshops throughout the year including a “Transition to Kindergarten” meeting; the community is alerted as to the DOE timeline for registering incoming kindergarten children. 2. Sharing of records/info: Most of our students are zoned and remain at this site for Kindergarten In that case, teachers fill out information cards and share the info with the Kindergarten children. If a child leaves our Pre K for another school, all records/comments are forwarded to the new school 3. 4. Curriculum is aligned to the CCLC; Citywide Instructional Expectations and pre-k teachers are involved in all Professional Development regarding such along with school’s teaching staff. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 1. MOSL School Based Team 2. SLT 3. Teacher Team Meetings 4. Instructional Team Meetings 5. Inquiry with Data Specialist 6. Professional Learning Committee 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5C, 8 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 456,364.00 2018-19 CEP 70  x x 6, 8 5A, 5C, 8 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 0 11,200.00 0 5,264,452.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 2018-19 CEP 71  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 72  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Staten Island School of Civic Leadership, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Staten Island School of Civic Leadership will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 CEP 73   fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 2018-19 CEP 74   holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and PTA meetings throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day and evening events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  hosting events to support, asserting leadership in education for their children. parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand;  Continue SISCL Leadership Awards Ceremony as an event following every PTA meeting  7 Habits Signature Parent Training  Continue to utilize a telephone messaging system that would provide parents with a prerecorded message from the principal or other administrator about upcoming events, important meetings or school emergencies  Electronic access to grades through stars classroom and Pupil Path / Skedula.  Electronic text message communication through Remind.com, Pupil Path, Class Dojo  PTA Newsletter  Conduct Curriculum Orientation Conference and/or Teacher Introduction Conferences within the 1 st or 2 nd month of the school year introducing them to the Curriculum Map and Common Core Standards.  Continue to develop the SISCL email system and the SISCL website to establish and maintain a reliable source of communication and outreach. In addition, in grades 6-8 the use of electronic grade books such as stars classroom and Pupil Path / Skedula.  Provide Material and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, particularly a leveled reading book list on the SISCL website.  Create workshops to provide assistance to parents in understanding the CCSS, Periodic and State assessments.  Create a book exchange club at PTA meetings.  Continue using Raz-Kidz.com, myON in the lower grades and myON and LightSail in the upper grades as a supplemental reading tool at home and in class.  Create workshops to provide assistance to parents in understanding the CCSS, Schoolnet Periodic Assessments and State assessments.  Continue using IXL.com as a supplemental math tool at home and in class.  Arts Workshops for parents and children  Culminating performances and/ or exhibitions of art displays and music performances. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Staten Island School of Civic Leadership, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 75  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Back To School Night; CCSS Parent Trainings; Leader In Me Parent Training Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents   creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 2018-19 CEP 76   sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;    Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 77  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Staten Island District 31 School Name Staten Island School of Civic Leadership School Number 861 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Donna Nilsen Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Donyal Svilar Teacher/Subject Area Margaret Desimone / LeadTeache Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Frank Morano Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent Deborah Rodriguez, SLT Parent Coordinator Lynda Bernstein Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 78  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 903 Total number of ELLs 29 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.21% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At the Staten Island School of Civic Leadership (SISCL), there are several ways in which we assess the literacy skills of our students including our English Language Learners. Since we are a pre-K to 8 school, some of our assessments are school-wide and others are specific to either our elementary-level students or our middle school students. At SISCL, we use the research-based Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System to determine a student’s independent and instructional reading level; this enables us to match leveled books to readers in order to provide differentiated instruction and work with small groups for targeted guidance and intervention. We monitor the reading progress of students in K-8 through Fountas and Pinnell and track progress using the newly implemented Reading Tracker system. Using the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, a student’s reading level can be assessed three times each year and in turn yield information on reading level, accuracy, fluency, and comprehension. This system offers optional assessments to monitor progress in phonemic 2018-19 CEP 79  awareness, phonics, letter learning, and high frequency word knowledge. We also use teacher-created performance assessment tasks, reading inventories, running records, and guided reading/writing conference notes to monitor literacy progress. Middle school teachers also use the DRP, Word Generation, performance assessment tasks, and teacher-created rubrics to monitor reading and writing progress across genres. Writing is also assessed using grade-level, teacher- created rubrics, checklists, individual writing conferences and student observation. In September 2013, we began to administer the NYC Performance Test in ELA in Grades K-3 as well as NYC Performance Tests in Social Studies (Grades 6,7,8) and in Science (Grades 6 and 7). Students in Grades 3-8 will also take NYC Benchmark Assessments in ELA. Other formative or curriculum-embedded assessments utilized in our K-8 classrooms include exit slips, gallery walks, hands signals to indicate on-the-spot understanding of a specific concept, socratic seminars, success criteria checklists (teacher and/or student created), and learning progression continua/exemplars. We utilize these formative and curriculum-embedded assessments in order to gauge what students know and need to know during a unit of study so that our teachers can change or adapt instruction to better satisfy the diverse learning needs of our students as well as provide opportunities for students to take ownership of the learning process and reflect on their learning process during a unit of study. The data collected through the regular assessment of our students is used to guide the instructional plan of our school. Our school leaders and teachers are regularly working on their curriculum maps and adjusting them to reflect the information yielded from assessments. The teachers of individual classes, along with our data specialist, look for class-wide and school-wide trends in order to analyze any performance gaps. These statistics are translated into data driven instruction for our students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The data collected through the regular assessment of our students is used to guide the instructional plan of our school. Our school leaders and teachers are regularly working on their curriculum maps and adjusting them to reflect the information yielded from assessments. The teachers of individual classes, along with our data specialist, look for class-wide and school-wide trends in order to analyze any performance gaps. These statistics are translated into data driven instruction for our students. Our data specialist prepares a breakdown of the data yielded from the Fountas and Pinnell assessments , performance assessments, and benchmarks for each class immediately after administration and analyzes the class data for strengths, weaknesses and patterns. The data specialist shares the information with the classroom teachers as soon as possible so that teachers can make timely adjustments to their curriculum maps and instructional plans to build on areas of strength and to plan focused intervention for areas of weakness. In addition, our data specialist shares the information yielded from the performance data across the grades with school leaders in order to identify schoolwide areas of concern/growth; our professional development cycles are designed to address the diverse learning needs of our student population including our English Language Learners and our students with disabilities. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success of SISCL’s ELL program is measured through a comprehensive overview of ELL student data and student work. When evaluating the success of our programs for ELLs, we examine how well our ELL population performs on key standardized tests (NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, Science) as well as the data and information generated from the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, benchmark assessments, performance tasks and teacher observation. Each school year, we administer a benchmark assessment in ELA and Math in Grades 3-8 in the fall and spring. We also administer a performance assessment twice a year in ELA and Math (Grades K-2), in Science (Grades 6 & 7) and in Social Studies (Grades 6-8). In Spring 2017, we began to administer the performance assessment in ELA and Math to Grades 3-8. We examine how well our former ELLs perform in the classroom and on standardized tests after they are no longer entitled to ELL services. Since former ELLs are entitled to two additional years of testing accommodations on the NYS ELA, Math, and Science tests, we maintain a list of students eligible to receive allowable accommodations such as additional time, and use of word-to-word glossaries; we use that list to track their test performance to ensure that they have sufficient support to succeed academically and socially. We also utilize the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) with Advanced Early Warning Indicators to examine the data carefully in 2018-19 CEP 80  order to focus on the progress of specific subgroups of ELLs toward achievement of English language proficiency as well as to design/adjust effective instructional programs and/or interventions for the respective students. The factors that can be analyzed on the EDAT include home language, grade level, years of ELL service, ELA/math performance and progress, NYSESLAT proficiency and progress, attendance, age, holdover status, SIFE status, and disability classification. The Early Warning (At-Risk) Indicator feature automatically calculates the number of risk factors associated with each student and color-codes them so that our school leaders and educators can provide and tailor targeted interventions for our at-risk students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The data collected through the regular assessment of our students is used to guide the instructional plan of our school. Our school leaders and teachers are regularly working on their curriculum maps and adjusting them to reflect the information yielded from formative and summative assessments. The teachers of individual classes, along with our data specialist, look for class-wide and school-wide trends in order to analyze any performance gaps. These statistics are translated into data driven instruction for our students. Our data specialist prepares a breakdown of the data yielded from the summative assessment and analyzes the data for areas of strengths and weaknesses and patterns across a grade or spanning grades. The data specialist shares the information with the classroom teachers so that teachers can make adjustments to their curriculum maps to build on areas of strength and to address areas of weakness. In addition, our data specialist shares the information yielded from the summative performance data across the grades with school leaders in order to identify schoolwide areas of concern/growth; our professional development cycles are designed to address the diverse learning needs of our student population including our English Language Learners and our students with disabilities. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] According to the EDAT data analysis for our school, there were zero ELLs who scored at or below 25th growth percentile and scored at level 1 or 2 on the Spring 2016 ELA and two ELLs who scored at or below 25th growth percentile and scored at level 1 or 2 on the Spring 2016 NYS Math. However we are concerned that out of 17 ELL students in Grades 3-8 who attended SISCL in the 2015-2016 school year and sat for the Spring 2016 NYS ELA/Math test administration, 7 ELL students scored on Level 1 on the ELA exam and 8 ELL students in Grades 3-8 scored on Level 1 in the Math exam. Seven of the 17 ELL students in Grades 3-8 also received additional testing accommodations as per their IEPs. With these concerns in mind, we use the data collected to develop highly effective professional development cycles and to guide instruction for ELLs within the RtI framework. Our school leaders have implemented a professional development plan to improve the level of classroom instruction in order to close the gap between student performance and grade-level expectations. Our recent schoolwide professional development cycle focused on the formative assessment process with an emphasis on unpacking the state standards and using learning progressions; this cycle helped provide our staff a common framework to gauge what students know and need to know during a unit of study so that our teachers would be able to change or adapt instruction to better satisfy the diverse learning needs of our students as well as provide opportunities for students to take ownership of the learning process. We looked carefully at the progression of skills for certain standards across the grade levels in order to assess where the students are in terms of their current performance levels and what steps they need to take to move up the learning continua toward grade level expectations. There are several targeted interventions offered at SISCl for our ELL students. The daily AM period along with push-in periods are utilized for tiered academic intervention. At SISCL, classroom teachers are assigned periods for pushing-into other subject areas to provide additional small group or individualized support for struggling students. In this way, a teacher who is familiar with a student can provide academic intervention services in the classroom setting. After-school test preparation classes are available for students who are not meeting grade-level expectations in different subject areas. Several teachers at SISCL offer extra support to their students during lunch periods. ELLs who require additional interventions above and beyond their mandated ELL services are designated ‘at risk’ and participate in these small AIS groups. They are also invited to participate in the afterschool programs and encouraged to take part in lunch period study groups. During these interventions, students are grouped based on common learning needs. The teachers analyze information and data from student work and assessments to monitor progress. Data continuously drives the instruction provided in these interventions. Teachers use the workshop model in a small group setting to support literacy strategies, apply skills to text, respond to focused 2018-19 CEP 81  writing tasks and respond to literature for specific skill development. In addition, guided reading is used as an intervention in these small groups. In math, teachers use interactive student lead groups and games to support the understanding and application of mathematical skills. Our teachers are also using learning progressions in the classroom and intervention settings to analyze student work in order to identify specific trouble areas along the learning continua for struggling/at-risk students. We are also using learning progressions to create formative assessment tools to monitor progress and tailor instruction to the learning needs of struggling/at-risk students. We stress several components in our core instruction and intervention groups to meet the learning needs of our diverse student population including our ELLs, FELLs, and SWDs. One key component is extensive oral language development through rich discussion, debates and conversation; this oral language development is supported by scaffolds such as language frames for speaking and listening, multifaceted vocabulary instruction, multimedia presentations, interesting visuals and interactive reading aloud. Another key component we stress is the integration of oral language and vocabulary instruction in writing instruction by providing students with the opportunity to express their thinking orally before putting it into writing and to share their writing with peers and teachers in order to get constructive feedback. We are also using writing exemplars across the learning progressions to provide students with concrete examples of writing across the grades/ proficiency levels as well as extensive modeling across the curriculum. In addition, we provide students struggling with phonemic awareness and phonics with extra small group support using programs such as Fundations, Orton Gillingham, and Wilson. In order to build reading comprehension in our struggling students, we try to draw on the students’ funds of knowledge/ interest and build their background knowledge across the curriculum, model close reading techniques/strategies (such as highlighting, chunking, .and annotating), emphasize the use of transitional words and phrases to unlock meaning, and teach/model the usage of all-purpose academic words as well as content-specific vocabulary. When an ELL student is not making benchmark progress, we work together with his/her parents to find appropriate interventions that will help the student advance toward grade-level expectations while taking into consideration his/her individual language learning needs and time in the ELSS as well as their special education settings and services when applicable. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our school administers the NYSESLAT in April and May annually to ELL students in Grades K-8. The Spring 2017 NYSESLAT was recently administered and included six grade bands (K, 1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8, 9-12). Since 2015, the overall structure and format of the NYSESLAT has changed significantly from previous renditions and now includes a thematic approach based on the common core state standards. The NYSESLAT now measures five performance levels instead of four. The five performance levels are Entering (formerly Beginning), Emerging (formerly Low Intermediate), Transitioning (formerly High Intermediate), Expanding (formerly Advanced) and Commanding (formerly Proficient). Every year in September, our ENL teacher downloads the RLAT, RNMR, and RESI ATS reports to the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) ,formerly known as the Data Analysis and AMAO Estimator Tool, to analyze student progress on the NYSESLAT and English language proficiency as well as to analyze achievement data in the content areas (ELA, Math). The EDAT also includes demographic information in a number of areas such as home language, years of ELL service, attendance, SIFE status and disability classifications. This tool can be used to monitor our ELL’s progress on the NYSESLAT and NYS ELA and Math exams as well as hone in on specific ELL subgroups. The analysis of the NYSESLAT data drives the instruction of our ELL students. The ELL Data Analysis Tool report provides a comprehensive way to analyze student progress on the NYSESLAT as well as achievement data in the content areas (ELA, Math). Another tool we can use to monitor the progress toward English language proficiency is the ATS RLAT report that provides information on the last three NYSESLAT test administrations. We are able to as hone in on specific ELL subgroups on EDAT and in turn direct student focus on areas of weaknesses and/or stagnation after looking at the data. Although we are focusing greater attention on developing higher order reading and writing skills, we are also targeting the development of 2018-19 CEP 82  academic listening and speaking skills. We use student strengths to build new concepts, skills and strategies. All teachers- ENL, special education, content area, classroom- use testing data to differentiate the instruction given to their students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL teacher along with the data specialist utilizes the EDAT and RLAT reports to prepare a breakdown of the data yielded from the NYSESLAT and track the progress of ELL students toward the commanding level of English language proficiency. The EDAT analyzes the data for areas of strengths and weaknesses across the modalities and across subgroups so that the ENL and classroom teachers can make adjustments to their instructional plans to build on areas of strength and to target areas of weakness in small group instruction. In addition, our data specialist shares the information yielded from the summative performance data across the grades with school leaders in order to identify schoolwide areas of concern/growth; our professional development cycles are an outgrowth of schoolwide concerns and are designed to address the diverse learning needs of our student population including our English Language Learners and our students with disabilities. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have a Free-Standing English as a New Language (ENL) program in our school for grades K through 8 that provides instruction in English with home language support as needed and emphasizes English language acquisition. As per CR Part 154, there are 2 types of ENL- Stand-alone ENL and Integrated ENL. As per the NYCDOE English Language Learner Policy and Reference Guide, Stand-alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses; this instruction is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. Integrated ENL is instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a dually certified teacher or co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL (90 minutes per week). Our ENL teacher is dually certified with TESOL and Nursery, Kindergarten & Grades 1-6 Certification. Stand-alone ENL instruction at SISCL is delivered through a small-group pull-out program as well as push-in services whenever there is a cluster of ELLs in a given class. ELL students in grades K through 5 are serviced in small groups according to their grade and proficiency levels with the mandated number of units as per the CR Part 154 Requirements; some groups may span two contiguous grades. Our middle school ELL students in grades 6-8 who receive Stand-alone ENL instruction based on their entering or emerging proficiency levels receive small group pull-out services prearably during the AM Period. Where possible, our dually certified ENL teacher will provide Integrated ENL instruction in the classroom in collaboration with general education classroom teachers where there are clusters of ELLs and FELLs in ELA, Math, Social Studies or Science. If necessary to ensure all ELLs receive mandated services, our dually certified ENL will provide mandated Integrated ENL instruction in small groups through the content area where small number of ELLs at the expanding may be scattered over multiple classes over contiguous grades. According to the updated NYC DOE ELL Policy and Reference Guide, students with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) are ELLs who have attended schools in the United States (the 50 States and the District of Columbia) for less than twelve months and who, upon initial enrollment in such schools, are two or more years below grade level in literacy in their home language and/or two or more years below grade level in mathematics due to inconsistent or 2018-19 CEP 83  interrupted schooling prior to arrival in the United States. Schools now have 30 school days from initial enrollment to make an initial SIFE determination. The first step in determining SIFE status begins during the completion of the Home Language Identification Survey; the parent/ guardian is asked to indicate prior schooling during the interview. After following all of the steps in the ELL Identification Process, the ELL staff must follow up on any indicators that a student has had an interruption or inconsistency in their formal schooling and proceed with the SIFE Identification Process. The SIFE Identification Process pertains to students who are Newly identified ELLs, and In grades 3 to 9, and at the beginner/entering or low Intermediate/emerging level of proficiency as indicated by the NYSITELL results. The SIFE Identification Process includes the NYSED Oral Interview Questionnaire, NYSED Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener (MLS) and a Writing Screener. The NYSED's website includes a full description of resources, guidance documents, and the SIFE identification tools; the NYSED tools replace those tools that were previously available only to NYCDOE schools (LENS). The ELL staff uses the information yielded from these SIFE Identification tools to determine the initial SIFE status which is then indicated in the DOE’s data collection systems (BNDC) no later than 30 days from the student’s initial enrollment. As per CR Part 154, schools have up to one year to make a final determination of SIFE status; therefore, schools may modify the initial SIFE identification for up to one year. SIFE status is removed once the ELL scores at intermediate/transitioning level or higher on the NYSESLAT. At the present time, we do not have any students who fit the SIFE category. If that situation would change, the SIFE students would participate in our freestanding ESL program in a grade-appropriate group geared toward their proficiency level and receive the mandated number of minutes of ENL instruction. We would make every effort to team up our SIFE students with another student who shares the same language background for additional academic, language and emotional support. We would extend all opportunities to participate in additional programs such as AIS, extended day small group instruction, and any available Title III After-School or Saturday programs. In addition, we would also ask the support personnel in our School Assessment Team to provide additional guidance and expertise to best determine how to help these particular students make academic progress and achieve success in our school setting as well as cope with any social adjustment issues that may arise from their lack of experience in a formal school setting. b. TBE program. If applicable. We currently do not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. We currently do not have a Dual Language Program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ENL teacher works with several ELL groups across Grade K through 8 in our Free-Standing English as a New Language (ENL) program. She provides instruction in English with home language support as needed and emphasizes English language acquisition. As per CR Part 154, there are 2 types of ENL- Stand-alone ENL and Integrated ENL. There are now five language performance levels instead of the traditional four- entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding. Based on CR-Part 154 regulations, entering and emerging ELLs at SISCL receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction with 180 minutes of Stand-alone ENL and 180 of integrated ENL with an emphasis on core content. All transitioning ELL students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction with 90 minutes of Stand-alone ENL and 90 of Integrated ENL. All expanding Ell students receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction. We make every effort to place our ELLs in small group settings geared to their proficiency level and grade level. The ENL teacher provides books, glossaries and materials in the native language to support ELL students whenever possible; she also assists Spanish- speaking students with interpretation as needed. We also try 2018-19 CEP 84  to place newcomer students who may need home language support in classrooms with bilingual paraprofessionals whenever possible. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Free-standing ENL program provides intensive English language and content area instruction. We work hard to align our ENL instruction to the grade-level literacy and content curriculum in order to support and reinforce the targeted literacy skills in the classroom. Our goal is to provide a rich language learning environment that incorporates the four language modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) while developing language and academic skills in literacy and the content areas so that our ELL students can begin to work independently in the classroom. We strive to expose ELLs to meaningful language and literacy experiences through interactive activities, with a focus on teaching the necessary higher-order thinking skills. In a low-anxiety learning environment, our ELLs are encouraged to take risks and actively participate in scaffolded language-learning so that they become independent learners and achieve grade-level standards in all areas. The ELL student’s needs are supported in their content areas both by the ESL/ENL teacher and the classroom teachers. The ESL/ENL teacher uses the curriculum maps created by the classroom teachers to align lessons/tasks/activities to the standards and instruction planned by the classroom teacher. The "workshop model" is used throughout the building. Teachers scaffold learning to help the child understand the information presented using the learning progression continua. The home language cognates are used to support vocabulary comprehension. Lessons contain visuals and repetition to aid in language development and fluency. The students are taught content specific vocabulary with visuals and ‘just right’ texts. Hands-on activities and classroom technology (i.e. IPads, smartboards, audible recordings) are utilized to help the students understand the concepts being taught in their content areas. The students are also taught key English grammar structures or provided sentence frames that they need to speak and write about their understanding of the content they are covering. The students are given opportunities to speak the language using content specific vocabulary and scaffolds such as sentence frames and HOTS lead-ins. The students are given differentiated work to best develop their English language acquisition as well as their content area knowledge base. All lessons are based on the NYS Common Core State Standards for College and Career Readiness. Within the ENL program, our ENL teacher utilizes a variety of materials and resources designed to meet the diverse needs of our students and to differentiate our instructional plan. In the early childhood grades the ENL teacher is using Wilson’s Fundations, a research–based program that develops phonemic awareness, and Rigby’s On Our Way to English program which provides grade-level and content-based thematic instruction focused on the specific needs of ELLs on various proficiency levels. We supplement our instruction with ‘big books’, predictable texts, leveled library books, chants, rhymes, poetry, and cumulative patterns. We also focus on non-fiction texts to develop and reinforce vocabulary and content area concepts. Furthermore, we use a variety of learning centers and manipulatives, such as computer and listening centers, picture/word cards, alphabet tiles, realia, and other literacy-based tools. The ELL students in grades 2-8 are currently using a series called Language Power: Building Language Proficiency created by Teacher Created Materials. These kits provide English Language Learners content-rich, differentiated instruction to build English-language proficiency as well as content area knowledge. Each kit is anchored by a level-appropriate text set and provides rigorous instruction in the four language domains–listening, speaking, reading, and writing. There is a range of reading levels within each text set to support opportunities for differentiated instruction. Sentence frames are used to scaffold the use of appropriately complex language structures and to provide structured support for speaking and writing. An audio CD is provided for additional support for students In the freestanding ENL program the students are taught new vocabulary in context using visuals and ‘just right’ texts. Hands-on activities are utilized in science and social studies to help the students understand the concepts being taught. The students are also guided through their writing tasks with accompanying grammar instruction. They are given differentiated work to best assist their language acquisition. English grammar is highlighted in context, demonstrated and practiced in writing. The students are encouraged to think more deeply about complex texts by using higher order thinking skills to gain comprehension when reading both fiction and non-fiction. There are numerous ways in which ELL students are supported in their content areas by the ENL and classroom teachers. Listening centers are utilized to support to the ELLss with their fluency and comprehension. Classroom teachers label as many things as they can in their classroom. Classroom teachers use content-specific word walls along with multimedia visual aids in the classrooms. Every SISCL classroom is a literacy-rich environment. Teachers use the school library as well as the teacher’s resource room which contain bilingual books on a multitude of subjects to support their students’ native language and content area knowledge. 2018-19 CEP 85  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When our students are initially tested with the NYSITELL, our eligible ELLs who speak Spanish as their home language are given the Spanish Language Assessment Battery to assess home language skills as well as to determine language dominance. We meet with our ELL parents and students to find out what home language skills and formal education students may have in their funds of knowledge. We interview the upper-grade ELL students to find out if they are able to use bilingual dictionaries and word-to-word glossaries to aid them in their English language development as well as to support them in their content area instruction. We also train the students to use the word-to-word glossaries if they have home language literacy skills as their use is an allowable accommodation on NYS standardized exams. The Newcomer ELL students taking the NYS standardized assessments in the content areas are given the home language version of the exam when available. When written translations are not available in specific languages, a trained translator is used to orally translate the test for them. Our ELL students who have home language literacy skills are encouraged to use word to word glossaries in their home language. These accommodations are provided as per the guidance of the New York State Department of Education. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At the present time, we do not have any students who fit the SIFE category. If that situation would change, the SIFE students would participate in our freestanding ESL program in a grade-appropriate group geared toward their proficiency level and receive the mandated number of minutes of ENL instruction. We would make every effort to team up our SIFE students with another student who shares the same language background for additional academic, language and emotional support. We would extend all opportunities to participate in additional programs such as AIS, extended day small group instruction, and any available Title III After-School or Saturday programs. In addition, we would also ask the support personnel in our School Assessment Team to provide additional guidance and expertise to best determine how to help these particular students make academic progress and achieve success in our school setting as well as cope with any social adjustment issues that may arise from their lack of experience in a formal school setting. The ELL staff uses the information yielded from the different SIFE Identification tools on the NYSED site to determine the student's initial SIFE status which is then indicated in the DOE’s data collection systems (BNDC) no later than 30 days from the student’s initial enrollment. As per CR Part 154, schools have up to one year to make a final determination of SIFE status; therefore, schools may modify the initial SIFE identification for up to one year. SIFE status is removed once the ELL scores at intermediate/transitioning level or higher on the NYSESLAT Our newcomer ELLs participate in our freestanding ENL program; they are placed in grade-appropriate groups and receive the mandated number of instructional periods of ENL according to their English proficiency level. The ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teacher to help engage the newcomer and make him/her feel comfortable in the new school setting. They are often given a classroom buddy to help assist them in completing work and following classroom rules as well as to provide some emotional support during the adjustment period. The newcomer is often given easier texts and materials according to their listening, speaking, reading and writing proficiency levels; they may also use home language materials provided by the curriculum publishers (i.e. Go Math! or McGraw-Hill Reading Wonders ) whenever possible to keep pace with the classwork. The newcomer students work diligently to quickly gain the language needed for daily life in a new class in a new school in the English Language School System. They are given instruction in social behaviors that are expected in their new environment. Classroom teachers often set up listening centers to give students an opportunity to listen to and follow along with story selections; interactive computer programs and websites are also used to engage and support our newcomers in the classroom. Our newcomer ELLs in Grades 3-8 who will be taking the NYS ELA may participate in our AIS programs as well as the extended day session with their classroom, subject area or ENL teacher. Additionally, they are invited to participate in any available Title III After-school Enrichment program; ELLs in grades 3 through 8 work in small groups to reinforce English language skills as well as develop the literacy and content area skills required to succeed on the standardized NYSESLAT, ELA and Math state exams. Our developing ELLs who are receiving services for four to six years participate in our freestanding ENL program. Students are placed in grade-appropriate groups and receive the mandated number of periods according to their proficiency level. They may also receive small group instruction from our AIS providers where lesson plans are designed to 2018-19 CEP 86  strengthen their literacy, math, and content area skills. ELLs receiving service in the 4 to 6 year category as well as our Long-term ELLs will be assessed by the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher to determine what their specific learning needs are. Some of the assessments used at SISCL include Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, NYC Performance Test Series in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies, NYSESLAT, and other standards-based teacher-created assessments. Appropriate materials and texts will be used to help our ELL students develop their language, literacy and academic skills. Teachers will provide academic intervention when needed to help students move to the next proficiency level. The ENL teacher will concentrate on developing high level literacy, language, and thinking skills as well as provide language support in the area of vocabulary development, oral language, reading and writing. Teachers will assess their reading and writing levels and work with the students to help improve sentence structure, paragraph formation and more complex writing assignments expected of their grade level according to the CCSS. The students in these categories may attend any available Title III After-school Enrichment programs where ELLs work in small groups to reinforce English language skills as well as develop the literacy and content area skills required to succeed on the standardized NYSESLAT, ELA and Math state exams. Our ELL students are also provided with the allowable testing accommodations such as the use of glossaries and extra time for the NYS ELA, Math, and content area exams. We may also ask the School Assessment Team to provide additional expertise and guidance to assist our ELLs in their academic and social progress. In some instances, some ELLs with extended years of service are evaluated by School Assessment Team and the results indicate a need for mandated services such as an IEP teacher, speech services or an alternative setting; the goal is to provide the optimal learning environment that meets the needs of each individual student to assist them in achieving to their fullest potential. Our Long-term ELLS who are receiving services for over six years participate in our freestanding ENL program. Our Long-term ELL students are placed in grade-appropriate groups and receive the mandated number of periods according to their proficiency level. They may also receive small group instruction from our AIS providers where lesson plans are designed to strengthen their literacy, math, and content area skills. Our Long-term ELLs will be assessed by the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher to determine what their specific learning needs are. Some of the assessments used at SISCL include Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, NYC Performance Test Series in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies, NYSESLAT, and other standards-based teacher-created assessments. Appropriate materials and texts will be used to help our ELL students develop their language, literacy and academic skills. Teachers will provide academic intervention when needed to help students move to the next proficiency level. The ENL teacher will concentrate on developing high level literacy, language, and thinking skills as well as provide language support in the area of vocabulary development, oral language, reading and writing. Teachers will assess their reading and writing levels and work with the students to help improve sentence structure, paragraph formation and more complex writing assignments expected of their grade level according to the CCSS. The students in these categories may attend any available Title III After-school Enrichment programs where ELLs work in small groups to reinforce English language skills as well as develop the literacy and content area skills required to succeed on the standardized NYSESLAT, ELA and Math state exams. Our ELL students are also provided with the allowable testing accommodations such as the use of glossaries and extra time for the NYS ELA, Math, and content area exams. We may also ask the School Assessment Team to provide additional expertise and guidance to assist our long-term ELLs in their academic and social progress. In some instances, some ELLs with extended years of service are evaluated by School Assessment Team and the results indicate a need for mandated services such as an IEP teacher, speech services or an alternative setting; the goal is to provide the optimal learning environment that meets the needs of each individual student to assist them in achieving to their fullest potential. Beginning in the 2015-16 School Year, there are three ways for students to exit ELL status and thus no longer be considered ELLs; an ELL student must score at the “proficient/commanding” level on the NYSESLAT OR score at “advanced/expanding” level on the NYSESLAT AND level 3 or 4 on the grades 3 to 8 NYS ELA exams OR score at “advanced/expanding” level on the NYSESLAT AND 65 or above on the NYS ELA Regents exam. For options 2 and 3 above, the scores must be the result of test administrations that occur within the same school year. When a student meets the criteria for one of these options, the student will be classified as a Former ELL. Former ELL students who scored on the commanding (formerly proficient) level during the last two administrations of the NYSESLAT will receive test accommodations such as extended time and use of home language glossaries when they take any citywide or state exams. Even though they are no longer eligible for ESL services, they will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week for two years after reaching the commanding/ proficient level on the NYSESLAT. In addition, their classroom and content area teachers will provide additional support for them as they gain greater independence in the English language and the academic learning environment. They may need extra help in the classroom to make sure they are 2018-19 CEP 87  comfortable and stay on grade level in their literacy and math blocks. The AIS periods previously mentioned are used to support any of our FELLs who are struggling academically. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELLs in self-contained and Integrated Co-Teaching classes participate in our freestanding ENL program. Students are placed in grade-appropriate groups and receive the mandated number of periods of instruction according to their proficiency level. Our ELL-SWDs also receive all services and modifications indicated on their IEPs, including speech therapy, SETSS, occupational therapy, physical therapy, and specified testing accommodations. NYSESLAT samplers are shared with the special education teachers so that they are aware of the types of language skills and tasks the students will be assessed on; in that way, they can provide additional support and instruction to our ELL-SWDs in the four modalities. Some instructional strategies we have found to be most effective when working with our ELL-SWDs include but are not limited to the use of graphic organizers, visual representations, modeling, role-playing, total physical response, and cooperative flexible grouping. Materials used with these strategies are grade and English proficiency level appropriate. These instructional strategies and grade-level materials provide access to academic content areas and aid in accelerating English language development. Our ELL-SWDs are taught new vocabulary in context using visuals and ‘just right’ texts. Hands-on activities and TPR are utilized in science and social studies to help the students understand the academic language as well as the content concepts and vocabulary being taught. The students are also guided through their writing tasks using graphic organizers with accompanying grammar instruction. They are given differentiated work to best assist their language acquisition. English grammar is highlighted in context, demonstrated in shared writing activities and then practiced in independent writing. The students are encouraged to think more deeply about complex texts by using higher order thinking skills to gain comprehension when reading both fiction and non-fiction. Our teachers utilize existing technology such as IPads and smartboards to create engaging lessons with embedded supports. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to meet the needs of our ELL-SWDs, our staff is comprised of a variety of support specialists. This includes a school psychologist, guidance counselors, ESL teacher, SETSS providers, special education teachers as well as occupational, physical and speech therapists. In addition bilingual paraprofessionals are assigned to our ELLs when appropriate. ELLs who are identified as a SWD have an Individualized Education Program (IEP) that outlines expected educational outcomes for each student and recommends specific interventions. When an ELL student is not making benchmark progress, we work together with the parents to find appropriate interventions that will help the student advance toward grade-level expectations while taking into consideration his/her individual language learning needs and time in the ELSS. We may place the student in a small group setting during AM periods or AIS push-in periods (when co-teachers in our triad model provide small group or individualized support across the subject areas as a lead teacher teaches the whole class) or SETSS program with a certified special education teacher where lesson plans are designed to strengthen their literacy, math, and content area skills, develop their test-taking skills and strategies, and to familiarize them with the standardized test formats in a small group setting. Before an ELL is considered for an evaluation for other services, our school follows the NYCDOE RtI model that is based on three tiers of instruction and intervention support that increase in duration and intensity over time. Factors that we consider when working with our ELLs include their familiarity with and exposure to English, level of proficiency in English and the home language, and. prior schooling experiences. We also consider whether both languages were learned at the same time or whether one language is learned and then followed by the other language. When a student is not responding to the RtI interventions and perform six months to a year below grade level expectations, we consider other types of settings for the student. If an ELL-SWD is not progressing in their current setting, we consider other available options such as an ICT, SETSS services, etc. after using the RtI model. We consider whether the student needs consistent and continuous support in all academic areas as well as peer modeling and interaction ; we consider whether the student has difficulty making transitions.. We may place a student in a general education class for subject areas in which he/she demonstrates success and engagement. These critria are some of the factors we consider to place a student in an ICT or small-group setting to enable them to meet their individualized goals. Our ELL-SWDs are actively involved in many programs and interact with other students in the broader school community on a daily basis. For example, they participate in the Lighthouse Committee, Student Government, 2018-19 CEP 88  grade trips and assemblies, STEM, and clubs. Our overall goal is to engage and empower all our learners by providing them with a continuum of support. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. There are several targeted interventions offered at SISCL for ELL and FELL students. The AM period along with push-in periods are utilized for academic intervention in math, ELA, science and social studies as well as enrichment programs/clubs geared toward increasing student engagement and involvement. At SISCL, classroom teachers are assigned periods for pushing-into other subjects to provide small-group or individualized support for struggling students while a lead teacher is providing instruction to the whole class. This enables students to receive ongoing, sustained academic support and intervention from familiar teachers who know the whole child. This built-in support occurs across the subject areas- ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. After-school test preparation classes are available for students who are not progressing toward grade level standards in Math, ELA and Science. Several teachers at SISCL offer extra support to their students during lunch periods. ELLs who require additional interventions other than those provided in their mandated minutes are designated ‘at risk’ and are taken in these small AIS groups, selected to participate in the afterschool programs and encouraged to take part in teacher-led lunch period study groups. During these periods, students are grouped based on common needs. The teachers analyze student work and data from various assessments. Data continuously drives the instruction provided in these interventions. Teachers use the workshop model in a small group setting to support literacy strategies, apply skills to text, respond to focused writing tasks and respond to literature and informational text for specific skill development. In addition, guided reading is used as an intervention in these small groups. In math, teachers use interactive games and student- led groups to support the development and application of math skills as well as deeper understanding of math concepts. In ELA, we have several targeted intervention programs in addition to the AIS grouping explained above. Interventions we utilize to target areas of weakness to provide students with resources to use at school and at home include: Really Great Reading Co.'s Phonics Suite (Blast Foundations, Phonics Blast, Phonics Blitz, Phonics Boost), Raz Kids, MyOn, Fundations, Wilsons, IXL, WordGen ( a cross-disciplinary academic vocabulary and language programs designed to help students use academic language to articulate their thinking), Leveled Literacy Intervention, guided reading groups as well as book clubs/circles. Several of the literacy sites such as RazKids and MyOn have Spanish language books in their selections. In Math, teachers use IXL, Khan Academy, BrainPop, performance task exemplars, WordGen, ilearn as well as available translations of Go Math! to provide targeted intervention and develop content area concepts/skills and academic language. In Social Studies, the Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Social Studies NYC curriculum offers an interactive component. The iLearn program offers additional supports for our middle school studies pursuing regents classes or learning Spanish. WordGen is also used in the middle school across subject areas and provides discussable dilemmas in a multidisciplinary format that explores social studies themes and content. Teachers often use the content area literacy resources listed above to provide additional background knowledge to students as well as BrainPop and Discovery Education. In Science, teachers utilize Foss Kits in English as well as Spanish, teacher-created labs and demonstrations, informational literature on various sites mentioned above in ELA, WordGen, and ilearn. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At this time, SISCL has limited plans to add new programs for our ELL students due to budget constraints. We are looking into the cost of supplementing existing programs with additional student copies of leveled informational text sets and adding updated NYSESLAT test preparation materials. However we are always striving to make improvements. We are in the process of adapting our ELL instructional materials across the grades to ensure that our ELLs are exposed to materials that promote higher order thinking skills and incorporate the Common Core Learning Standards. We are also working on developing content-based thematic units that incorporate the four modalities to familiarize the ELL students with the new NYSESLAT format. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At the present time, SISCL has no plan to discontinue any programs or services for ELLs. We will continue to monitor the success of all programs and services to ensure that they contribute to the progress of our ELL students. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 CEP 89  Our English Language Learners are afforded equal access to our school programs. They are exposed to technology in the elementary and middle school classrooms, the content area classrooms and other programs through the use of desktop and laptop computers, IPads, Smartboards, audio-listening centers, and projectors. Our ELLs along with the rest of our student population participate in enrichment programs related to the arts through various school partnerships as well as in our Music and Fine Arts programs. They participate in our AM/AIS program for additional small group instruction in literacy, math, and content areas. K-8 students are invited to join the teacher leader clubs which take place during the AM period twice a week. This includes the Lighthouse Committee, Student Government, Service Learning, STEM, Volunteer Chorus and Volunteer Band. The CHAMPS sports and fitness programs are available to all of our middle school students at no cost. NYSID offers several free after-school programs during the year such as dance, basketball, and art and offers a fee for service afterschool program. Our middle schoolers also participate in School’s Out New York City (SONYC), a free program which serves as a pathway to success and offers young people a choice in how they spend their time, provides rigorous instruction in sports and arts, and requires youth leadership through service. In the SONYC program, the City itself becomes a classroom through trips and opportunities for instruction beyond the traditional learning setting. In addition, SISCL’s subject area teachers provide after-school test preparation classes focusing on developing skills for the common core state exams. As stated in earlier sections, our ELLs are invited to participate in available Title III programs that run after the regular school session. When programs are available, our ELLs are invited to participate in summer school programs for additional enrichment. Our school leaders ensure that our ELL students participate in all school programs by reaching out to our ELL parents to ensure they understand the various offerings. We provide translated notices and make follow-up phone calls in the home language using bilingual paraprofessionals, teachers, and parents whenever possible. Our parent coordinator makes every effort to reach out to all parents in our learning community to provide them with the information they need to ensure their children have access to all school programs as well as the tools they need to help their children succeed academically; whenever necessary, she provides access to interpreters and translators. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All of our teachers- classroom teachers, Literacy and Math AIS providers, special education teachers, content area teachers- at SISCL strive to make content comprehensible to all of our students including our ELLs. We have stocked our classroom libraries with many leveled books in a variety of genres to ensure that students have the opportunity to read diverse books at their reading level to support their learning across the content areas. We also have purchased the ELL component of our research-based Wonders reading series for additional literacy support for our ELLs and our struggling readers. We have Spanish language materials that correspond to the materials used in classes. We use many visuals from Rigby On Our Way to English programs (such as maps, models, charts, and photos), multimedia presentations (such as video clips from Discovery Education), graphic organizers (such as "I Wonder", Somebody Wanted But So Then organizers, Venn diagrams, and KWL/RAN charts) to make content accessible to our ELL students as well as provide them with tools to navigate the language, literacy, and content. We also strive to build background knowledge by making content comprehensible through modeling, hands-on materials especially in science and math, visuals, gestures, and video clips as well as front-loading and emphasizing key vocabulary across the curriculum. We encourage the use of Smartboards so that teachers can provide additional visual support during lessons and presentations. We also provide native language-to-English glossaries and dictionaries to our ELL students as well as picture dictionaries (Longman , Treasure Chest) to help them navigate the curriculum. In ELA, we have several targeted intervention programs in addition to the AIS grouping explained above. Interventions we utilize to target areas of weakness to provide students with resources to use at school and at home include: Really Great Reading Co.'s Phonics Suite (Blast Foundations, Phonics Blast, Phonics Blitz, Phonics Boost), Raz Kids, MyOn, Fundations, Wilsons, IXL, WordGen ( a cross-disciplinary academic vocabulary and language programs designed to help students use academic language to articulate their thinking), Leveled Literacy Intervention, guided reading groups as well as book clubs/circles. In Math, teachers use IXL, Khan Academy, BrainPop, performance task exemplars, WordGen, ilearn as well as available translations of Go Math! to provide targeted intervention and develop content area concepts/skills and academic language. In Social Studies, the Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Social Studies NYC curriculum offers an interactive component. The iLearn program offers additional supports for our middle school studies pursuing regents classes or learning Spanish. WordGen is also used in the middle school across subject areas and provides discussable dilemmas in a multidisciplinary format that explores social studies themes and content. Teachers often use the content area literacy resources listed above to provide additional background knowledge to students as well as BrainPop and Discovery Education. In Science, teachers utilize Foss Kits in English as well as 2018-19 CEP 90  Spanish, teacher-created labs and demonstrations, informational literature on various sites mentioned above in ELA, WordGen, and ilearn. in addition, our art teacher uses a program called ARTSONIA with his students in Grades 1-4 where they create a digital portfolio. The digital portfolio has a writing component where students write about how they created their artwork in Artist Statements. Our school was ranked second for the number of submitted statements. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? There is a wide range of native language literacy among our ELLs. In order to assess the level of literacy in our ELLs’ native language, as well as their formal schooling, we review Part II of the Home Language Survey carefully and interview our parents and students during conferences. As ENL and classroom teachers, we provide extra support to meet the special needs of our newcomer students with limited or inadequate formal schooling. This includes familiarizing them with classroom routines, appropriate learning behaviors, and social interaction skills. We also encourage peers from the same native language background to team up with newcomers for additional language and emotional support. In addition, we have added a section in our library with books in the predominant native languages. Our bilingual paraprofessionals and teachers will often provide translation assistance for our newcomer students who may need native language support to understand the grade curriculum. In addition, we have a supply of native language glossaries and dictionaries for our ELLs available for use when needed to provide content area, language, and academic support. The ENL classroom has bilingual fiction and non-fiction texts to support the ELL students. Many teachers set up listening centers as a way to provide instruction in both languages. Students are encouraged to use laptops, IPads, and translation devices for native language support as well as access to bilingual activities. We currently do not have a DL or TBE program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ELL students are placed in grade-appropriate groups and receive the mandated number of units according to their language proficiency level. In our stand-alone ENL program, we will only group students across two contiguous grades if necessary. We place our ELL students in grade-appropriate groups and work on grade-level content and skills through resources such as Rigby’s On Our Way to English program for the corresponding grade level and Teacher Created Materials’ Language Power kits for the corresponding grade span and proficiency level. Classroom and ENL teachers use the ELL components of common core based literacy and math programs such as Go Math! and McGraw-Hill's Wonders to ensure that our ELLs have every opportunity to access grade-level language, literacy and content. All of our teachers- classroom teachers, special education, literacy and math AIS providers, content area teachers- at SISCL strive to make content comprehensible to all of our students including our ELLs and our SWDs through the Universal Design for Learning framework. We build background knowledge by making content comprehensible through modeling, hands-on materials especially in science and math, visuals, gestures, and video clips as well as pre-teaching and emphasizing key vocabulary across the curriculum; we give our students alternative ways to demonstrate what they have learned through choice of activities and projects. We encourage the use of Smartboards so that teachers can provide additional visual support during lessons and presentations. We modify the curriculum for our special education students and plan according to their IEP goals and learning styles; we also ensure they receive all accommodations during standardized testing. We also target our ELL-SWDs for additional support during AIS push-in periods when co-teachers in our triad teacher teams provide small group or individualized support across the subject areas as a lead teacher teaches the whole class. In addition, our paraprofessionals provide individualized and small group support for our ELL-SWDs in their classrooms. In addition, we use the resources and intervention program listed below in the four core subject areas. The myriad of programs we use give us the flexibility we need to provide and expand the resources for our ELLs across the K-8 grade span.In ELA, we have several targeted intervention programs in addition to the AIS grouping explained above. Interventions we utilize to target areas of weakness to provide students with resources to use at school and at home include: Really Great Reading Co.'s Phonics Suite (Blast Foundations, Phonics Blast, Phonics Blitz, Phonics Boost), Raz Kids, MyOn, Fundations, Wilsons, IXL, WordGen ( a cross-disciplinary academic vocabulary and language programs designed to help students use academic language to articulate their thinking), Leveled Literacy Intervention, guided reading groups as well as book clubs/circles. In Math, teachers use IXL, Khan Academy, BrainPop, performance task exemplars, WordGen, ilearn as well as available translations of Go Math! to provide targeted intervention and develop content area concepts/skills and academic language. In Social Studies, the Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Social Studies NYC curriculum offers an interactive component. The iLearn program offers additional supports for our middle school studies pursuing regents classes or learning Spanish. WordGen is also used in the middle school across subject areas and provides discussable dilemmas in a multidisciplinary format that explores social studies themes and content. Teachers often use the content area literacy resources listed above to provide additional background knowledge to students as well as BrainPop and Discovery Education. In Science, teachers utilize Foss Kits in English as well as Spanish, teacher-created labs and demonstrations, informational literature on various sites mentioned above in ELA, WordGen, and ilearn.. 2018-19 CEP 91  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? While our school is co-located with a District 75 school, we do not share an ELL teacher. However, we have an inclusion program with District 75. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). SISCL holds a family orientation before the official start of the school year to give incoming parents an opportunity to visit the school and meet school leaders and teachers. We typically invite the newly enrolled students entering kindergarten as well as students entering SISCL from other elementary schools in the sixth grade. During the orientation, students and parents are introduced to the school staff including as our principal, Ms. Nilsen and our assistant principals, Mr. Morano and Mr. Valia. Many of our teachers attend the orientation; in particular our kindergarten and sixth grade teachers meet and greet the incoming parents. Our parent coordinator Mrs. Bernstein provides information about the policies and procedures of SISCL, such as arrival and dismissal, uniforms, busing, programming, etc. Our nurse Ms Stumpf does a brief presentation concerning health issues and contact information. Our dean Mr. Menditto outlines clear expectations of student conduct and behavior in the school building. Our nurse Our guidance counselors Ms. Barckhaus and Ms. Martinez also introduce themselves to the incoming families. Parents are encouraged to ask questions if they need further clarification. Our principal stresses that SISCL has an open-door policy and considers parent involvement critical to the academic success of our students and our school. At that time, our kindergarten families are given a tour of several kindergarten classrooms and the incoming middle schoolers are given a tour of the third floor so that students and parents have some familiarity with the classroom and school setting. Several interpreters such as Ms. Martinez are available to assist parents who require language assistance as well as key staff members to answer questions during and after the orientation. Our school leaders support our teaching staff in their efforts to help our 5th and 8th grade students (including our ELLs) as they transition from elementary to middle school and from middle school to high school. Our administrators communicate with the teachers in the contiguous grades to find out how well our students are adjusting to their new classroom setting and to the accelerated demands of the middle school and high school common core curriculum. As SISCL is a relatively new pre-K to 8 school that has grown in stages since Fall 2009, several teachers have taught different grade levels as new grades have been added to the school. Because of this flexibility, our elementary school teachers have had multiple opportunities to vertically plan with their middle school colleagues and make adjustments in curriculum and practices to support students in their elementary to middle school transition. Some of our current fifth grade teachers previously taught middle school grades and are well aware of the challenges students face in middle school. The fifth grade teachers emphasize and reinforce college and career readiness skills and explicitly infuse academic vocabulary and discourse in the ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies curriculum to prepare them for the middle school common core curriculum. Different strategies and activities are utilized to foster greater student independence and responsibility, to encourage effective student group work and discussion, and to develop time management skills; these activities and strategies include explicitly teaching students how to take notes and maintain ongoing ELA and content area vocabulary logs, assigning weekly homework and ongoing projects, incorporating project-based learning activities, and using student organizers/trackers to keep track of assignments and activities. Students also participate in clubs so that they get accustomed to traveling to different classrooms and interacting with different teachers and students. Our guidance counselor also visits middle school classes to introduce herself to the students and offer help and guidance to ease them into the transition to middle school. In order to support our eighth grade students In their transition to high school, our administration has implemented the use of ILearn in several content area classrooms; some of our eighth grade students including our ELLs and FELLs are able to participate in high school level classes through ILearn and take the NYS Regents in algebra, living environment and US history in June. In general, the eighth grade is more departmentalized than our earlier grades that adhere to a triad structure so students become adept in traveling from one classroom to another and adjust quickly to different teachers and classroom settings. Overall the academic rigor is steadily increased in the eighth grade classroom to prepare student for the high school common core standards. For example, our eighth grade math teacher incorporates NYS Regents questions in classwork and explicitly connects the questions to the eighth grade math curriculum throughout the school year. Our eighth grade science 2018-19 CEP 92  teacher trains students in the process of completing detailed lab reports that parallel high school level work. SISCL’s focus on civic leadership propels our eighth graders toward success in high school and college and career readiness. Our eighth grade guidance counselor provides the students with vital information about the high school application process and assists students and parents through the entire process step by step. Each year Ms. Martinez attends PD regarding the high school application process and learns about any changes in the process or offerings. She begins the high school application process during the spring when students are still in seventh grade so that students are aware of the high school application process and begin to discuss their options with their families during the summer months. An evening high school application workshop is offered to the students and parents at SISCL in October. During the workshop, the step-by-step application process is presented and explained in a PowerPoint presentation. Translation and interpretation is provided as requested. In addition the eighth grade guidance counselor presents new information to the students during their lunch periods and class visits. She distributes notices about deadlines, scheduled high school fairs and open houses. She assists in setting up a high school fair at SISCL for our students and families. She also meets individually with students and looks over the high school applications to make sure students have made informed choices and have met qualifications for any selected programs. In addition, she is available throughout the school day to give students and parents independent guidance with the application process. Translation and interpretation is always available when requested. The Office of Student Enrollment provides multilingual information on the NYCDOE site; the NYC High School Directory as well as Specialized High School Handbook are available in many languages and distributed at the school. Many trained interpreters are available for assistance at the Citywide and Boroughwide High School Fairs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? During the 2013-2014 school year, our school began to offer Spanish as an elective in several middle school classes that include ELLs and FELLs. We are using the PowerSpeak program offered through ILearnNYC which provides instruction in the Spanish language and culture. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? SISCL currently does not have a Dual Language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Ongoing professional development is a critical aspect of our school’s success. At SISCL, professional development opportunities are offered to our entire PreK-8 staff including our common branch teachers, content area teachers, special education teachers, paraprofessionals and service providers (including speech therapist, occupational and physical therapists) to address the diverse needs of our student population including our English Language Learners and our students with disabilities. Along with our administrators, our lead teacher Margaret Desimone provides ongoing professional development at SISCL on a school-wide, grade-level and individualized basis. Some of the professional development topics planned for the 2017-2018 school year will reinforce and build on topics covered in the previous school year with an emphasis on the formative assessment process and learning progressions. The Citywide Instructional Expectations and the Framework for Great Schools are infused throughout our professional development plan with the goal of fostering reflective teaching practices as well as developing highly effective instructional practices that provide multiple options for learning for our diverse range of learners including our ELLs and students with disabilities. These professional learning sessions are held on Mondays from 2:30 to 2018-19 CEP 93  3:45.In the 2017-2018 school year, we plan to delve deeper in the formative assessment cycle with a focus on using learning progressions to analyze student work in order to identify specific trouble areas along the learning continua for struggling/at-risk students , monitor progress, and tailor instruction to the diverse learning needs of our student population. On September 18, 2017, we will have a refresher PD on the Renzulli online teaching tool that enables teachers to easily differentiate instruction. Our Formative Assessment professional learning cycle will begin on Monday, September 25,2017 and continue for the next 8 Monday professional development sessions. In addition to our in-house professional development plan, our elementary and middle-school teachers, service providers, support personnel and secretaries attend professional development opportunities offered by the Staten Island Borough Field Office. Our parent coordinator and our pupil accounting secretary attend an annual professional development offering from the Staten Island Borough Field Office that included a presentation from an ELL Compliance Performance Specialist about enrolling ELLs in the NYCDOE and the ELL Identification Process. Our ENL teacher also provides classroom teachers with strategies for teaching ELLs in monolingual classroom such as scaffolding, modeling, and the use of manipulatives and visuals. In addition, the NYCDOE Department of English Language Learners and Student Support has an expanding video library of high-quality professional development targeting the diverse needs of ELLs that is readily available to all teachers; our ENL teacher utilizes this site as well as refers colleagues to the site on a regular basis. Our ENL teacher also attends professional development offered by NYCDOE Department of English Language Learners and Student Support such as Collaborative Strategic Reading, Bolstering Advanced Literacy Skills for English Language Learners, and Brain Research: Keeping ELLs in Mind. She also attends professional development offered by the NYS Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network such as “INTEGRATED ENL: COLLABORATIVE COTEACHING PRACTICES FOR ENGLISH LEARNERS” with keynote speaker Dr. Andrea Honigsfeld on September 27, 2017. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As outlined above, our classroom teachers, special education teachers, content area teachers, AIS/ related service providers, and paraprofessionals attend in-house staff development conferences and grade conferences, other professional development opportunities in and outside of our school building offered by contracted vendors , as well as professional development opportunities offered by the Staten Island Borough Field Office and the NYC DOE Office of ELLs to ensure that they will be able to assist our ELLs as they transition from one proficiency level to another and to ensure that mandated PD requirements are met for our teaching staff. The ENL/ESL teacher also provides classroom teachers with strategies for teaching ELLs in monolingual classroom such as scaffolding, modeling, and the use of manipulatives and visuals.The NYCDOE Office of ELLs has an expanding video library of high-quality professional development targeting the diverse needs of ELLs that is available to all teachers. Our lead teacher also provides ongoing professional development that focuses on best instructional practices for diverse learners including our ELLs. A professional development schedule is maintained by our administration and our staff is required to sign in at all conferences to verify attendance. All staff members are encouraged to maintain records and agendas of any professional development they attend. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? As negotiated with the NYCDOE and the UFT, there is a 75-minute block of time immediately following the school day on Tuesdays; 40 minutes of this time period is earmarked for parent engagement. Our ENL teacher will be scheduling appointments with individual parents of ELLs during this time period to discuss the goals of the ENL program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s language proficiency assessment results (i.e .NYSESLAT and NYSITELL) as well as language development needs in the content areas. Ms. Svilar encourages our ELL parents to reach out for assistance or information whenever needed during the parent registration and orientation process; she will often assist parents during Curriculum Night and Parent Teacher Conferences if needed. Ms. Svilar also attends parent meetings with classroom/content 2018-19 CEP 94  area teachers or other service providers to provide additional support from a language acquisition perspective. If the Tuesday time slot is inconvenient, she will schedule meetings with parents before, during and after school when possible; phone conferences are also offered. Although Ms. Svilar speaks Spanish, she reaches out to another staff members for interpretation or uses the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The relationship between the school staff and the parent community at SISCL is extremely strong. We know that parental involvement is a key part of student success. Our Parent Coordinator, Lynda Bernstein, is the liaison among our staff, the students and parents. Mrs. Bernstein runs parent involvement workshops throughout the year that cover a variety of parental interests and concerns. Some workshop topics include high school applications, the Common Core State Standards, preparing your child for the state tests, supporting our fathers and more. Translation and interpretation is available at these meeting through parent volunteers. The parent community is invited to our school for a multitude of reasons. We have parent teacher conferences four times a year including a Curriculum Night in September and Student-Led Conferences in May. The parent teacher conferences are held during the afternoon and evening hours to make attendance convenient for all of our parents. The parents meet with their student’s teachers to specifically go over the student’s progress and address any areas of concern. Parents are also invited to the school for Curriculum Conferences. At Curriculum Conferences, the teachers meet with the parents as a grade specific group and go over what will be covered in the grade’s curriculum that year. Open school week is a time when parents are invited to the school to observe a typical school day for their student. In addition to these academic-oriented visits to the school, individual classes and groups of students participate in plays, assemblies, dance and music performances and celebrations throughout the year; parents are always encouraged to attend these events. Each month, there is a “Leader of the Month” awards ceremony following the PTA meeting to recognize individual students from each class. Parents are eager to attend these events. Our teachers are in direct communication with the parents of their students. In the beginning of the school year, welcome letters are sent home with the students introducing the parents to the teachers. When a student is struggling, the parents are notified to inform them of the situation. Parents and teachers discuss solutions and strategies that the parents can utilize at home to help their child(ren) progress and succeed. The classroom teachers and ENL teacher collaborate with each other when discussing the student’s needs with the parents of our ELL students. The ENL teacher will also be meeting with the parents of individual ELL students throughout the school year to discuss their progress and to facilitate parent involvement. In addition, SISCL has a very active and involved PTA. The members of the PTA are often in the school building and are an integral part of several of our annual traditions, such as the Thanksgiving Food Drive, the Coat Drive, the Winter Wonderland Family Night, the Halloween and Valentine’s Day Dance, Candy Sale, Candle Sales and so much more. Monthly PTA meetings are scheduled and the entire community is encouraged to attend Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 95 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Nilsen Donna, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 96  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: SI School of Civic Leadership School DBN: 31R861 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Donna Nilsen Title Principal Frank Morano Assistant Principal Lynda Bernstein Parent Coordinator Donyal Svilar ENL/Bilingual Teacher Deborah Rodriguez Parent Margaret Desimone / Lead Teach Anthony Lodico Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 97  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R861 School Name: SI School of Civic Leadership Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lynda Bernstein Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Effective communication with our entire parent community including our ELL families is a priority practice for P.S. 861. Upon registration, all parents complete a Home Language Identification Survey which includes an interview with the student and parent in the language of preference to determine the child’s home language. This oral interview with the parent and the child is conducted along with the completion of the Home Language Identification survey by a trained pedagogue. The revised Home Language Identification Survey includes a supplementary section that asks parents to indicate their language preferences when receiving important information from the school in written or oral communication. After reviewing this information, written translation and oral interpretation needs can be assessed at registration for the parents of our newly admitted students. The RAPL report on ATS captures that information to provide a tool to gauge the translation and interpretation needs of our parent community. The RCPL also provides a snapshot of the oral and written language needs of our parent community by percentage 2018-19 CEP 98  of the school population; this report can be compared from year to year to look for changes or shifts in population/needs. In addition to the RAPL report, we also review various ATS reports such as the Home Language Aggregation Report and the Place of Birth Report to monitor shifts in our demographics. In addition, we conduct informal interviews with the school staff as well as the parents of our ELLs or Former ELLs to assess their need for translation or interpretation services. We review records of the number of requests for interpretation and past participation of non-English speaking parents at school events, parent workshops, and conferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The majority of our families request written and oral communication in English. The next predominant languages of preference in order of demand are Spanish, Arabic, Urdu and Albanian. English Spanish Arabic Urdu Albanian Ukrainian 77.87 14.94 2.82 2.19 0.64 0.46 English Spanish Arabic Urdu Albanian Ukrainian 77.4 15.12 2.91 2.19 0.73 0.46 Bengali, Chinese, French, Italian Hindi, Portuguese, Russian, Vietnamese 0.18 (per language) Bengali, Chinese, French, Italian 0.09 (per language) Afrikaans, Hindi, Portuguese, Russian, Vietnamese 0.18 (per language) 0.09 (per language) 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not applicable (English and Spanish are the only languages that represent at least 10%) Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 99  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you plan Distributed to to translate? Families Include procedures We typically disseminate the SISCL Family Handbook, Half-Day Notices, School Break Notices, ELL Parent Notifications, Testing Calendar, NYSESLAT Test Notices, Title III After-School Notices, and Parent Teacher Conference (PTC) Notices. We give out the SISCL Handout in September, ELL Parent Notifications are handed out in September or within first ten days of enrollment. PTC notices are distributed in September, November, March, and May. NSESLAT notices are distribute in March and April. Other notices are distributed according to the school calendar to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We download official NYCDOE translated notices for holidays/breaks/etc as well as available staff. We download translated materials regarding tests such as the NYSESLAT from the NYSED website We download parent notifications for our ELL students regarding entitlement, continued eligibility, etc from the NYCDOE intranet website. We use the Translation and Interpretation Unit as needed We use available staff in our school building for day-to-day translation as needed. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 100  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Formal face-to-face meetings we typically have include parent teacher conferences held in September, November, March and May which include a Curriculum Orientation , IEP meetings with parents of students with disabilities, guidance meetings, ELL Parent Orientation, individual meetings with ELL parents as well as individual meetings with parent to discuss academic, social and behavioral issues. Some informal interactions include calls to parents due to illness, lateness and attendance issues, unreturned trip slips or notices, busing/transportation issues, and progress updates. PTC- September, November, March, May IEP meetings- throughout the school year plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We use available staff to provide interpretation services throughout the school year as needed. ELL Parent Orientation- early September or within ten days of enrollment We use available staff or DOE contracted interpreters during PTC as needed. Other meetings as needed Whenever necessary, we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit to provide language assistance. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use School Messenger to make emergency notifications or schoolwide announcements in English and Spanish. We use available school staff to assist in interpretation as needed via phone or in person. 2018-19 CEP 101  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The principal informs the staff during the opening staff conference that translation and interpretation services are available as needed. The parent coordinator reaches out to staff via announcement or email to find out if interpretation is needed during all parent meetings (especially PTCs). Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) • We have signs located in the entrance of the building indicating that we have translation and interpretation services available upon request. • All school notices are translated to the parent’s home language when requested. • NYC DOE documents are downloaded in several languages such as the EPIC parent notification letters for ELLs or lunch forms. • If the need arises,. a translator is hired through a DOE contracted vendor • Parent/community volunteers as well as school staff members interpret for our ELL families as well as other parents who request assistance. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? As stated above, the revised Home Language Identification Survey includes a supplementary section that asks parents to indicate their language preferences when receiving important information from the school in written or oral 2018-19 CEP 102  communication. After reviewing this information, written translation and oral interpretation needs can be assessed at registration for newly admitted students. The Parent Coordinator annually reviews the parent language survey where parents are able to indicate their language preference when receiving written documents or their need for oral interpretation when interacting with school staff. Our parent coordinator actively recruits parents to interpret and translate as needed for families who require assistance. After conducting informal interviews with the school community, we are also able to assess the need for translation or interpretation services. In addition, we review records of the number of requests for interpretation as well as past participation of non-English speaking parents at school events, parent workshops, and conferences. Our findings indicate that approximately ninety percent of the requests for translation and interpretation are from our Spanish-speaking families. In past years, there had been a growth in requests from our Arabic-speaking families but there has been a marked drop in the past year. Currently, we have an active parent community who can provide adequate translation and interpretation to the parent community when requested. Staff members including paraprofessionals and teachers also assist with translation and interpretation. We also use our funding for translation and interpretation to hire translators and interpreters for important events or conferences to ensure that we can effectively communicate with our parent community in a respectful manner. The findings of the school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs are reported at PTA General and Executive Board meetings, School Leadership Team meetings, faculty conferences, and grade meetings. 2018-19 CEP 103 
