2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X007 School Name: P.S. 007 KINGSBRIDGE Principal: MIOSOTIS RAMOS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS7, THE MILTON FEIN SCHOOL 100000010007 K-5 School Number (DBN): 10X007 3201 KINGSBRIDGE AVE. BRONX, NY. 10463 718-796-8695 Phone Number: 718-976-8679 Fax: MiosotisRamos mramos18@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Email Address: MiosotisRamos Siobhan Hill Richard Espinal Andrew Toplitsky Gabriella Pelaez George Irizarry Angel Suarez Richard Espinal Michelle Santana Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 10 MaribelTorres-Hulla Superintendent: 1 FORDHAM PLAZA, ROOM 836, BRONX, NY 10458 Superintendent’s Office Address: 2018-19 CEP 3  @schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741 5852 Phone Number: BRONX FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: 718-741 7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1 FORDHAM PLAZA, BRONX, NY 10458 nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MiosotisRamos Siobhan Hill Richard Espinal Olga Rentoumes N/A N/A N/A Andrew Toplitsky Michelle Santana Regina Cunningham *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/CHAIRPERSON UFT, TEACHER Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gabriella Pelaez George Irizarry Angelo Suarez Yolanda Wright Pamela Curtin Member/ Parent Member/PARENT Member/Parent Assistant Principal Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview To educate the whole child. To develop children, who will be college and career ready, capable of clear and sound reasoning, with a life-long love of learning. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Special Initiatives PS7 aims to achieve this vision through a: -rigorous academic program designed to promote college and career readiness; -daily Guided Reading for grades K-5; -Fundations (Phonics Program) for grades K - 2; -Differentiated Learning Program (DLP) for grades 3 - 5 based on data, item analysis and Fountas & Pinnell running records with a focus on Literacy and Mathematics activities for small groups of students; -Response to Intervention - SPIRE; -varied K-5 arts program. Partnerships PS7 partners with Mosholu-Montefiore After School, Alvin Ailey Dance Company, Ballet Hispanico, New York Road Runners, Bike NY and Dream Yard. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Context PS7 is located in the Bronx with an enrollment of 692 students, 543 Hispanic, 64 White, 45 Black, 29 Asian, 6 multi-racial and 8 American Indian/Alaskan Native. Of these 147 are classified ENL and 99 SWD students. Challenges PS7 faces a major challenge when each year approximately 110 students, from a nearby K-2 school (PS207), enter grade 3 and are significantly below the standard of education our grade 2 students entering grade 3 demonstrate. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School Strengths, Accomplishments PS7 worked to make progress in all elements of the Framework for Great Schools and our student outcomes confirm it. Additionally we have a cohesive school community where 99% parents are satisfied with the education that their child has received and 97% of teachers feel that order and discipline are maintained at this school and agree that leaders of this school place a high priority on the quality of teaching. Those who struggled with the shift in leadership have moved on to a neighboring school. Nonetheless, we have a high degree of staff morale, with many teachers applying to work at this school. PS7 is a school of excellence in the arts. We integrate the arts to align with the curriculum. We partner with a number of community organizations to develop the intellectual and social/emotional growth of our children. PS7 is a community that embodies our core values of achievement, collaboration, equity, growth, integrity and meaningful work. The staff and students work together to ensure that all people in the school are actively engaged in learning and reaching their potential. 2018-19 CEP 10  2017-18 Overall Data:  Attendance Rate 95.3%  120 Families Living in Temporary Housing and attending PS  0 Superintendent Suspensions 2018 STATE TESTS  49.3% students in Grades 3-5 achieved proficiency levels in NYSELA (1.4% increase from 2017)  51.2% students in Grades 3-5 achieved proficiency in NYS Math(4.0% increase from 2017)  For our SWD population, there was an increase of 1.1% n mathematics and a 5.4% decrease in ELA compared to 2017. For our ELL population there was an increase of 0.5% in ELA and 4.0% in mathematics compared to 2017.  Focus Our CEP goals are designed to build on our success to date & ensure continued improvement in closing the achievement gap for ALL students and our subgroups, English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities, in particular. We will focus on rigorous instruction, specifically in literacy through guided reading, differentiated teaching and learning, and writing in subject areas. We will ensure it is customized, inclusive and motivating as well as closely aligned with CCLS. To do this our teacher teams will collaborate to plan instruction for continued improvement of student outcomes and receive and attend professional development. Overall Instructional Focus If we build on best practices around the teaching of literacy through guided reading in the primary grades, students will build competencies in the areas of decoding, comprehension and building language (vocabulary). If we build on best practices around the teaching of social studies, students will acquire the necessary knowledge to improve in their ability to communicate learned skills about citizenship and history, both verbally and through writing, which will result in an increase in performance in ELA. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X007 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 758 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 49 49 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 37 36 13 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 78.1% % Reduced Lunch 22.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 81.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.66 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 49.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 1 1 15 95.3% 4.0% 12.7% 6.2% 4.7% 0.4% 4 2% 4.7 51.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. DANIELSON OBSERVATION DOMAIN 3 Instruction: ALL - Highly Effective/Effective 74%, Developing/Ineffective 26% 3b - Highly Effective/Effective 80%, Developing/Ineffective 20% 3c - Highly Effective/Effective 66%, Developing/Ineffective 34% 3d - Highly Effective/Effective 76%, Developing/Ineffective 24% Quality Review 2016-17 Instructional Core : 1.1 Well Developed 1.2 Proficient 2.2 Well Developed School Culture : 3.4 Well Developed Systems for Improvement : 4.2 Well Developed NYSELA 2018 2018-19 CEP 13   49.3% of all Grade 3-5 students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4  7.4% of ELL students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4  15.9% of SWD achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4  16.9% of SWD students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 3 students or 12 students State ELA Exam Percentage Proficient Students by Grade:  3rd Grade 52.7%  4th Grade 50.3%  5th Grade 44.4% NYS MATH 2018  51.2% of all Grade 3-5 students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4  14.9% of ELL students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4  17.3% of SWD students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4 State MATH Exam Percentage Proficient Students by Grade:  3rd Grade 51.0%  4th Grade 50.0%  5th Grade 52.5% Our 2017-18 Overall Data:  Attendance Rate 95.3%  120 Families Living in Temporary Housing and attending PS7  0 Suspensions Our School Survey:  75% parents took the survey (compared with 49% citywide)  98% teachers took the survey (compared with 81% citywide) Our priority need is to ensure teachers plan rigorous and engaging lessons to allow for student led discussions and inquiry. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 1: By June 2019 K-5 classes will have a complete portfolio of selected work samples for every student as an assessment tool for promotion and each portfolio will include 5 reading, 5 writing, 5 math, 3 science and 3 social studies pieces with each sample showing the process for improvement involving an original, a graded rubric with clear feedback resulting in a revised piece and student reflection. The portfolio pieces will be differentiated to meet the needs of specific populations like ELL and Special Education students. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We will ensure: Teacher teams Sept.'18 - June 2019 1. Develop a school-wide criteria for promotion interpreted by each grade team for their grade level and approved by supervisors; Grade Teams Administrators 2. Principal will present the guidelines for the contents of each portfolio product to show the process undertaken in developing the work:  process piece with a checklist and teacher feedback, final piece with graded rubric, teacher comment and  student reflection in student-led conference events. We will ensure: 1. The contents in portfolios will be built from class assignments and will correspond to the grade curricular; Teacher teams Sept. 2018- June 2019 Instructional Leaders, Grade Teams, Administrators 2. Written assignment for each content area will be included – 5 for Reading, 5 for Writing, 5 for Mathematics, 3 for Science and 3 for Social Studies; 3. As student Portfolios assists with comparison of achievement across classrooms an agreed set of standards will be developed to specify the types of work that can be included and the criteria used to evaluate the work. These will include specific modifications, as agreed for those with specific learning needs including, struggling learners, SWD and ELL students, 2018-19 CEP 15 Grade teams Sept 2018- June 2019 Instructional leaders, Grade Teams, Administrators Actions will include: 1. K-5 grade teams decide which assignments will be targeted for the Portfolio collection and devise a rubric for judging the quality of the work sample; 2. Guidelines are to be developed to address issues of teacher or peer involvement in revising draft work or in deciding on what to identify as a best piece; 3. Grade teams will devise a Portfolio Guide for Teachers that summarizes each grade’s decision in regard to the type of portfolio pieces chosen including the Progress/process Piece for each item (#1 to #5); 4. Due dates will be issued by Principal for each completed piece to be added into the Portfolio; 5. Portfolios will be available for review by supervisors and education visitors to the school. 1. Parents and families provided with information about the value of portfolio of student writing and the ELA Goals for reading and writing. School Community Oct 2018 - June 2019 Instructional leaders, Class Teachers, Parent coordinator 2. Three Publishing Parties/celebrations will be held. Two parent workshops will be conducted by individual teachers or in collaboration. 3. Invitations will be issued to parents to visit the classroom of their child to hear the process and the students' performance of their work. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 16  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core our school will invite parents to: - Open House - 2 times a year - Principal, Miosotis Ramos - Publishing Celebrations - 3 times a year by Classroom teachers -Parent workshops- at least 2 times a year by pedagogues, workshops conducted by our Guided Reading consultant, ENL teachers, Literacy & math coaches, and administrators Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Master Schedule programming twice a year (semester 1 - September - January and semester 2- February - June)to allow for common planning for all teachers and a shared variety of the arts for students - Consultant to provide PD and in class support - Nominated staff to provide PD - Additional non-fiction and fiction leveled texts as well as big books for shared reading in the lower grades - Per session funding for additional team planning - Funding for parent outreach and curricula workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2018 Benchmarks: -All classrooms have set up a Portfolio for each student in their class -There will be least 5 student writing pieces, with all components as outlined in the grade team guidelines, including process piece with a checklist and teacher feedback, final piece with graded rubric, teacher comment and student reflection. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) ELA & math simulations (multiple choice & open-ended) 3 times a year Fountas & Pinnell running records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? DANIELSON OBSERVATION DOMAIN 3 Instruction: ALL - Highly Effective/Effective 74%, Developing/Ineffective 26% 3b - Highly Effective/Effective 80%, Developing/Ineffective 20% 3c - Highly Effective/Effective 66%, Developing/Ineffective 34% 3d - Highly Effective/Effective 76%, Developing/Ineffective 24% Quality Review 2016-17 Instructional Core : 1.1 Well Developed 1.2 Proficient 2.2 Well Developed School Culture : 3.4 Well Developed Systems for Improvement : 4.2 Well Developed 2018-19 CEP 19  NYSELA 2017  55.1% all Grade 3-5 students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4 or 255 students  11.3% of ELL students, eligible to sit the test, achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 5 student or 11 students  16.9% of SWD students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 3 students or 12 students  29 of 33 Black or African American Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 87.9%)  24 of 39 White Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 61.5%)  177 of 364 Hispanic or Latino Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 48.6%)  150 of 229 Female students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 65.5%)  105 of 234 Male students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 44.9%) State ELA Exam Percentage Proficient Students by Grade:  3rd Grade 53.8%  4th Grade 62.1%  5th Grade 49.3% NYS MATH 2017  51.7% all Grade 3-5 students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4 or 246 students  15.6% of ELL students, eligible to sit the test, achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 5 student or 17 students  18.3% of SWD students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 3 students or 13 students  29 of 33 Black or African American Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 87.9%)  28 of 39 White Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 71.8%)  164 of 377 Hispanic or Latino Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 43.5%)  131 of 234 Female students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 56.0%)  115 of 242 Male students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 47.5%) State MATH Exam Percentage Proficient Students by Grade:  3rd Grade 50.6%  4th Grade 52.5%  5th Grade 51.9% Our 2016-17 Overall Data:  Attendance Rate 97.4%  143 Families Living in Temporary Housing and attending PS7  0 Suspensions Our School Survey:  75% parents took the survey (compared with 49% citywide)  98% teachers took the survey (compared with 81% citywide) Our priority need is to ensure a focus on a SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT that will facilitate full engagement within our school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 20  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 2 : There will be an increase of 5% of parents and teachers agreeing that our school is a place where students feel safe, supported and challenged, as evidenced in the 2017-2018 school survey by implementing ways that demonstrate safety is our main priority like arrival and dismissal procedures and changing of main entrance. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? - We have a clear pathway for decision making that is empowering for all members of the school community & these allow us to set responsibility for outcomes equally throughout the school community; Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Instructional leaders Teacher Committees - Expectations are set at (or beyond) grade level CCLS & we strive to optimize outcomes for all our students in order to achieve these standards - Instructional Leaders meet to analyze school data, share classrooms observations and review the grade teams agendas to establish and extend the culture of learning within the school - parents will be invited to take part in workshops on weekday mornings and weekends to learn about and implement their child’s learning expectations in the classroom, as well as other useful information such as; immigration applications and fire safety. - Instructional leaders maintain an ‘open-door’ policy to hear from teachers and families - Instructional leaders greet students during arrival and dismissal and communicate with their parents; - PD Committee will collaborate with administration to prepare the 2018-19 PD Plan to ensure development and delivery of academically engaging instruction to challenge and motivate students in our learning programs; - Differentiated Learning Period (DLP) providers will assist ELL’s and SWD’s in small groups in their general education classroom. - Inter-visitation is currently being implemented between colleagues and is based on the observation feedback; Teachers and families Sept.2018 to June 2019 Instructional leaders Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Instructional leaders Teachers and families Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Instructional leaders Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 22 - Teacher teams meet weekly to share best practices, meet with parents, perform inquiry work, and plan to better serve the needs of their students - Families are welcomed to make appointment to meet with their child’s teacher on Tuesdays and all parents are invited to Parent Teacher conferences, Publishing Parties and other school events to share student accomplishments - To include all students in our field trips parents may be required to accompany their child. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families and support their understanding of a supportive environment our school will invite parents to: - Middle school applications - June - Guidance Counselor, Kelly Links - Coffee hour- throughout the school year- parent coordinator, Laurie Rodriguez - Open House - 2 times a year - Principal, Miosotis Ramos - Publishing Celebrations - 3 times a year - Classroom teachers -Parent worshops- at least 2 times a year - classroom teachers - Getting Ready for 3rd Grade - May - June - 3 Grade teachers - Parent workshops - new initiatives- Consultant, A. Jenkins, Prin. Ramos Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Communication of specific schedule of events to appropriate sectors of school community; - Scheduling for staffing support for extra curricula school activities - Equipment to support the clubs and/or activities e.g. sporting activities, school trips, art and music activities - Materials to provide support for the running of teams (SLT, School Safety Team, etc) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 23  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2016 Benchmarks: - Reduction in the number of suspensions - 10% Reduction in demand for School Guidance Counselor - Record of increased attendance at school held workshops for families on curricula, health and school related issues. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Report AND SOHO Data for the school year 2017-18 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. DANIELSON OBSERVATION DOMAIN 3 Instruction: ALL - Highly Effective/Effective 74%, Developing/Ineffective 26% 3b - Highly Effective/Effective 80%, Developing/Ineffective 20% 3c - Highly Effective/Effective 66%, Developing/Ineffective 34% 3d - Highly Effective/Effective 76%, Developing/Ineffective 24% Quality Review 2016-17 Instructional Core : 1.1 Well Developed 1.2 Proficient 2.2 Well Developed School Culture : 3.4 Well Developed Systems for Improvement : 4.2 Well Developed NYSELA 2017  55.1% all Grade 3-5 students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4 or 255 students 2018-19 CEP 25   11.3% of ELL students, eligible to sit the test, achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 5 student or 11 students  16.9% of SWD students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 3 students or 12 students  29 of 33 Black or African American Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 87.9%)  24 of 39 White Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 61.5%)  177 of 364 Hispanic or Latino Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 48.6%)  150 of 229 Female students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 65.5%)  105 of 234 Male students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 44.9%) State ELA Exam Percentage Proficient Students by Grade:  3rd Grade 53.8%  4th Grade 62.1%  5th Grade 49.3% NYS MATH 2017  51.7% all Grade 3-5 students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4 or 246 students  15.6% of ELL students, eligible to sit the test, achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 5 student or 17 students  18.3% of SWD students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 3 students or 13 students  29 of 33 Black or African American Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 87.9%)  28 of 39 White Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 71.8%)  164 of 377 Hispanic or Latino Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 43.5%)  131 of 234 Female students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 56.0%)  115 of 242 Male students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 47.5%) State MATH Exam Percentage Proficient Students by Grade:  3rd Grade 50.6%  4th Grade 52.5%  5th Grade 51.9% Our 2016-17 Overall Data:  Attendance Rate 97.4%  143 Families Living in Temporary Housing and attending PS7  0 Suspensions Our School Survey:  75% parents took the survey (compared with 49% citywide)  98% teachers took the survey (compared with 81% citywide) Our priority need is to ensure teacher teams meet bi-weekly to plan rigorous instructional plans and strategies that will include tiered tasks for all students based on assessed learning needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 26  Goal 3: Student Work Committee will develop a shared understanding of the specific features of grade level achievement in writing and to identify strengths and obstacles to student learning and collaboratively determine instructional strategies that will address their learning and monitor effectiveness, as exemplified by 5% improvement in the short and extended responses in the NYS ELA Test 2019. The teachers will have the opportunity to participate in inter and intra visitations. The PD will be differentiated. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. To formulate instructional strategies and address the obstacles to student writing achievement, the Student Work Committee will review writing samples to share their findings with grade teams: Grade teams Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Instructional Leaders, Grade Teams 1. Using 1:1 conference; 2. Small group strategy lessons; 3. Using mentor texts; 4. Modeling a pertinent strategy for the whole class; 5. Reviewing the rubric; 6. Devising suitable checklist. Teacher teams will see to it that all student learning needs are addressed as indicated by assessments (both formal and informal) to ensure our struggling, learners, including ELL's and SWD can be successful - this will involve planning differentiated support such as grouping and tiered tasks for specific students. 2. Teachers in their grade meetings will periodically share student work from their own classes and: 1. devise written assessment tasks aligned to the grade level CCLS; 2. develop a shared understanding of associated rubric; 3. ensure expectations are clearly written with descriptors for each level of performance; 4. make certain that student-friendly language by actively involving students' participation in re-phrasing the rubric; 5. develop an alternative rubric for specific sub groups to ensure success at an challenging and achievable level for them at this stage. All Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders, Grade Teams 2018-19 CEP 28  3. Teacher teams research Mentor Texts to support an array of writing obstacles revealed by the work samples, including: All Teachers Sept.18 to June 19 1. writing modeled by the teacher and student writing from previous year; 2. opportunities for using mentor texts at various stages in the Writing Workshop (Mini Lesson, Guided, Independent and the Share) 3. having a collection of possible mentor texts for various purposes; 4. appropriateness of the genre; 5. accurate syntax and standard English grammar; 6. rich vocabulary; 7. precise academic vocabulary; 8. K-2 word study/Phonics to assist students with spelling. (sight words and phonetic spelling patterns) 4. Teacher teams develop a series of strategies for working with mentor texts, such as: 1. Shared reading of the chosen text 2. Model: I wonder if I can do that (Shelley Harwayne 1992 strategy) 3. Working with individuals or small groups to solve problems with drafting and revision 4. Using mentor texts either chosen by students or with students to model and explore different forms of expression 5. Assisting students to read aloud mentor texts to hear how the language works in a specific text 6. Helping students to transfer an idealized form of the writing into their own words and phrases 7. Conducting small group strategy lessons to fix up grammatical and/or clumsy or undesirable writing All Teachers Sept.18 to June 19 Instructional Leaders, Grade Teams Instructional Leaders, Grade Teams School Community Sept. 2018 June 2019 Instructional Leaders, All team Teachers will invite parents and family to 5 Publishing Parties in the school year. Before the Publishing Party, students will have: 1. Completed to publishing a piece of writing 2018-19 CEP 29 2. Compiled their writing piece with drafts and planning notes 3. Rehearsed how the presentation component of the Publishing Party will be conducted During the Publishing Party, students: 1. Will be invited to share with an audience 2. OR they will participate in a Museum Walk, whereby half the class presents to the other half before exchanging these roles 3. OR they will stay at their desks so that visitors to the classroom can go around to read student’s published work After the Publishing Party, students: 1. Are invited to share their positive opinions on the success of the Publishing Party 2. At the same time students will offer one thing that needs to be worked on, though in a positive way 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations families will be invited to: - parent meetings- Tuesdays - teachers - parent teacher conferences - 4 throughout the year, classroom teachers - Middle school applications - June - Guidance Counselor, Kelly Links - Coffee hour- throughout the school year- parent coordinator, Laurie Rodriguez - Open House - 2 times a year - principal, Miosotis Ramos - Publishing Celebrations - 5 times a year - Classroom teachers - Getting Ready for 3rd Grade - June - 3 Grade teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 30  - Master Schedule programming to allow for weekly common planning for all teachers; - Consultancy to provide PD and in class support; - Network staff to provide professional development; - Funding for resources for lesson plans within our units of study; - Per session funding for additional team planning; - Funding for parent outreach and curricula workshops; - Additional texts to act as mentor texts; Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2018 Benchmarks: - Examine student work samples, especially in the light of the findings of the Teacher Work Sample Committee - Grade teams review lesson and units to address the obstacles for grade level success in writing - Record of attendance at class level Publishing Parties by parents and family Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - In June review the total number of completed revised lessons series in writing units designed to improve students writing based on Student Writing Samples that conform to the criteria set out as part of the school expectations in September 2018 - Monitor the attendance at class Publishing Parties by parents and families as gathered and maintained by the Parent Coordinator Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. DANIELSON OBSERVATION DOMAIN 3 Instruction: ALL - Highly Effective/Effective 74%, Developing/Ineffective 26% 3b - Highly Effective/Effective 80%, Developing/Ineffective 20% 3c - Highly Effective/Effective 66%, Developing/Ineffective 34% 3d - Highly Effective/Effective 76%, Developing/Ineffective 24% Quality Review 2016-17 Instructional Core : 1.1 Well Developed 1.2 Proficient 2.2 Well Developed School Culture : 3.4 Well Developed Systems for Improvement : 4.2 Well Developed NYSELA 2017  55.1% all Grade 3-5 students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4 or 255 students 2018-19 CEP 32   11.3% of ELL students, eligible to sit the test, achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 5 student or 11 students  16.9% of SWD students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 3 students or 12 students  29 of 33 Black or African American Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 87.9%)  24 of 39 White Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 61.5%)  177 of 364 Hispanic or Latino Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 48.6%)  150 of 229 Female students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 65.5%)  105 of 234 Male students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 44.9%) State ELA Exam Percentage Proficient Students by Grade:  3rd Grade 53.8%  4th Grade 62.1%  5th Grade 49.3% NYS MATH 2017  51.7% all Grade 3-5 students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4 or 246 students  15.6% of ELL students, eligible to sit the test, achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 5 student or 17 students  18.3% of SWD students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 3 students or 13 students  29 of 33 Black or African American Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 87.9%)  28 of 39 White Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 71.8%)  164 of 377 Hispanic or Latino Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 43.5%)  131 of 234 Female students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 56.0%)  115 of 242 Male students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 47.5%) State MATH Exam Percentage Proficient Students by Grade:  3rd Grade 50.6%  4th Grade 52.5%  5th Grade 51.9% Our 2016-17 Overall Data:  Attendance Rate 97.4%  143 Families Living in Temporary Housing and attending PS7  0 Suspensions Our School Survey:  75% parents took the survey (compared with 49% citywide)  98% teachers took the survey (compared with 81% citywide) We will continue to strengthen teacher practice in all 8 approved Danielson components for 2017-18 in planning and instruction and specifically Domain 3 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 33  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 4: By October 2018 teachers will engage in shared leadership and decision-making through the creation of effective teacher teams. These committees will involve teams such as ENL, Student Work, Professional Development, Students with Disabilities, Arts Committee. Teacher Committees will involve collaboration on the challenges facing the school using data and student assessment information such as SAMs and student work, as evidenced by 3% growth in writing in writing on the NYS ELA 2019. The teachers will have an opportunity to attend professional development to meet their specific and individual needs outside of the school building. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Each Teacher Committee will devise a checklist of the characteristics for strong teacher teams including such concepts as: All Teachers Sept. 2018 Instructional leaders 1. genuine and sincere respect for and trust and confidence in their colleagues; 2. willingness to share ideas and resources; 3. desire to establish common grade-level goals and timelines; 4. willingness to divvy up responsibilities in a fair, equitable way. 2. Develop teacher teams 1. Professional Development Committee 2. English as a New Language Committee 3. Students with Disabilities Committee 4. Gifted & Talented Committee 5. Grade Meetings 3.Guidelines are developed for each team and for the team meetings, in terms of expected outcomes 1. Professional Development Committee (facilitate professional development depending on need 2. English as a New Language Committee (Review Baseline Assessments K-5 and NYSESLAT and set priorities for the work) 3. Students with Disabilities Committee (Review Baseline Assessments K-5 and set priorities for the work) 4. Gifted & Talented Committee (Vertical and horizontal, Looking at student work, planning for higher level instruction through project based work ). All Teachers Oct.18 - June 2019 Instructional Leaders and staff All Teachers Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Instructional leaders and all staff 2018-19 CEP 35  4. Teacher Teams will: All Teachers Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Instructional leaders and all teacher committees/teams 1. have leaders who ensure records are kept of their meetings and who will prepare reports the principal who will confer with Instructional Leaders to make recommendations for the work; 2. meet as schedules to consider student learning, improving teaching 3. create a clear defined purpose that will guide their work and specific measurable goals that they will achieve during the 2018-2019 school year. 4. focus on writing, based on the school’s instructional focus 5. report back to the teachers school-wide, to adjust teaching practices in order to meet the needs of our students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families and support their understanding of effective school leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement families will be invited to: - Parent Association meetings - Monthly - President, Richard Espinal - parent meetings- Tuesdays - teachers - parent teacher conferences - 4 throughout the year, classroom teachers - Middle school applications - June - Guidance Counselor, Kelly Links - Coffee hour- throughout the school year- parent coordinator, Laurie Rodriguez - Open House - 2 times a year - principal, Miosotis Ramos - Publishing Celebrations - 3 times a year and parent workshops - Classroom teachers -Friday Evening Family Nights- regularly- Administration, parent coordinator, teachers -Saturday Parent Workshops - administration, teachers 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - PD materials - Master schedule for PD 2018-19 - Master schedule for grade team meetings - Master schedule for meetings of all the teacher committees - Per session funding for additional planning for instructional rigor and assessment tools Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2017 Benchmarks: - F & P Reading Levels from October 2018 compared with F&P levels in May 2098 - Growth of Grades 3-5 performance from ELA Simulation I to ELA Simulation 2 - Growth of Grades 3-5 performance from Mathematics Simulation I to Mathematics Simulation 2 - Growth of Grades 3-5 performance in ELA, Math Simulation Tests, for our subgroups Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Percentage of growth for all students by grade and by subgroup Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. DANIELSON OBSERVATION DOMAIN 3 Instruction: ALL - Highly Effective/Effective 74%, Developing/Ineffective 26% 3b - Highly Effective/Effective 80%, Developing/Ineffective 20% 3c - Highly Effective/Effective 66%, Developing/Ineffective 34% 3d - Highly Effective/Effective 76%, Developing/Ineffective 24% Quality Review 2016-17 Instructional Core : 1.1 Well Developed 1.2 Proficient 2.2 Well Developed School Culture : 3.4 Well Developed Systems for Improvement : 4.2 Well Developed NYSELA 2017  55.1% all Grade 3-5 students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4 or 255 students  11.3% of ELL students, eligible to sit the test, achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 5 student or 11 students 2018-19 CEP 38   16.9% of SWD students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 3 students or 12 students  29 of 33 Black or African American Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 87.9%)  24 of 39 White Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 61.5%)  177 of 364 Hispanic or Latino Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 48.6%)  150 of 229 Female students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 65.5%)  105 of 234 Male students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 44.9%) State ELA Exam Percentage Proficient Students by Grade:  3rd Grade 53.8%  4th Grade 62.1%  5th Grade 49.3% NYS MATH 2017  51.7% all Grade 3-5 students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4 or 246 students  15.6% of ELL students, eligible to sit the test, achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 5 student or 17 students  18.3% of SWD students achieved proficiency levels 3 and 4, or 3 students or 13 students  29 of 33 Black or African American Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 87.9%)  28 of 39 White Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 71.8%)  164 of 377 Hispanic or Latino Students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 43.5%)  131 of 234 Female students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 56.0%)  115 of 242 Male students achieved proficiency levels 3 & 4 (or 47.5%) State MATH Exam Percentage Proficient Students by Grade:  3rd Grade 50.6%  4th Grade 52.5%  5th Grade 51.9% Our 2016-17 Overall Data:  Attendance Rate 97.4%  143 Families Living in Temporary Housing and attending PS7  0 Suspensions Our School Survey:  75% parents took the survey (compared with 49% citywide)  98% teachers took the survey (compared with 81% citywide) Therefore we will have a continued focus on improving family and community outreach Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 39  Goal 3 : By June 2019 there will be a 3% improved attendance at school sponsored workshops as a result of our efforts to build on the partnership with families and community organizations. We will continue to invite families in for Friday Night activities that have proven to be successful and add new and exciting activities that will promote participation and family attendance. We will bring resources in to support the community to empower and educate parents like support in technology, and on how to support their children academically and emotionally. 2018-19 CEP 40  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent coordinator and Principal plans and conducts Parent-Child Activities: Families Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal  ELL Parent Workshops to inform parents new to NYC school system and to encourage an exchange of ideas and open discussion of parental understandings and concerns Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principals, teachers Story Night  Movie Night  Game Night  Arts and Crafts   Physical Game Night   Talent Show Sip and Paint   Experiencing Testing Workshops - designed to show the Zumba level of rigor required by students and will include discussion with families as to how they might support their children  People's Theater Arts Program Our regular communication with families highlight some of the following aspects: - Instructional Leaders open door policy; - Principal, assistant principals, School Guidance Counselors and teachers communicate with parents on a range of issues affecting student performance at school, as requested and/or required Families and students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders Parent Coordinator, administrators - Translation services made available at all times -Outreach organizations activities are planned, scheduled and communicated across the school community. School community Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders, administrators 2018-19 CEP 41 To promote communication: Remind, messenger service, website, memorandums Families Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Leaders Parent Coordinator, administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Alvin Ailey Dance Company, Ballet Hispanico, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Funding allocated for Parent Coordinator and his activities, including workshops; - Monthly calendar of events is sent home & monthly Principal letter; - Parent Conferences advertised with Flyer advertise school events; - Scheduling and information home in regard to in school and out of school activities through community organizations and city agencies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2017 Benchmarks: - All members attend SLT Meetings, evidenced by minutes - 3% increase in attendance at monthly PTA meetings, evidenced by attendance sheets - 3% increase in attendance at Open House functions, based on sign in sheets Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Coordinator record of attendance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 42  2018-19 CEP 43  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) K-2 Fountas& Pinnell Level Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Guided Reading, Small group strategy groups Small Group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) As scheduled during school After school As scheduled during school After school As scheduled during school Small Group One to one, small group As scheduled during school As required &/or scheduled during school Small group strategy lessons & fluency practice Small Group Small group reading & word study lessons Small Group 3-5 Simulation Tests & NYSELA Test 2018 K-2 Math Baseline 3-5 NYS Math Tests & Math Baseline All 3-5 students Mathematics Science DRA Levels & NYS Tests All 3-5 students F&PLevels, NYS Tests Teacher recommendation & parent request Mandated Small group reading & word study sessions Role play in regard to student issues As determined by IEP Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 141 Students in Temporary Housing, including Doubled up, In the Shelter, Other Temporary Living Situations 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  We will provide emergency school supplies, such as uniforms, exercise books, pens and pencils etc, as required  Additionally we will ensure that education supplies, such as fiction or non-fiction texts and novels are given to support full engagement with instruction  We will have in place a system of referral whereby social and emotional needs are in need of support from relevant service providers such as family and individual counseling, school nurse etc Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 45  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 46  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Recruitment is conducted through Open-Market and applicants are required to demonstrate their knowledge  of the curricula, including a relevant demonstration lesson Student are observed to identify talent and promote skills that support self-esteem and a well-rounded educational experience  PS7 provides clear professional expectations, supported by school-based learning experiences to enhance a sense of community and shared responsibility  Professional development workshops are conducted by Principal, Assistant Principals and/or Coaches based on the PS7 PD Plan and our CEP goals.  Teachers are informed at whole school, team meetings and individually, as appropriate and required  Appreciation luncheons for teachers and staff are offered before the holiday period to support staff morale  Access to differentiated, whole grade/staff professional development opportunities to enable them to fulfill  their role and to achieve high level of professionalism Fulfillment and professional satisfaction that is achieved through the team structure of the school whereby teachers collaborate to share & to collaboratively plan to support one another in implementing new curricula. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Job-embedded support for teachers (classroom and cluster teachers), designed to foster a supportive professional community through shared learning experiences, such as: revising the ELA and Mathematics curricula;  understanding and using the Danielson Framework for Teaching;   devising multiple entry points for our struggling, ELL and IEP students;   analyzing and monitoring individual student data from 4 ELA and 4 Math Simulations; supervisors and coaches provide differentiated professional support (modeling, inter-classroom visits, 1:1 tailored planning meetings, as deemed necessary, or requested); grade teams meet weekly to collaboratively plan;  continuous access to professional in class support – as requested and/or required;   new teachers meet weekly with their grade leader, or coach, to receive mentoring; 2018-19 CEP 47   all teachers participate in 1:1 meeting with supervisor, following an observation, for timely and actionable feedback that is based on the Danielson framework for Teaching; Professional development on the Common Core Standards (CCS) and aspects of the DOE Instructional Shifts in ELA/Literacy and Mathematics. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 1. Collaborate with feeder schools to set expectations for pre-school stability 2. We have multiple activities at this school, including: set up tours of the building   Parent Coordinator, Administration conducts 2 Orientation meeting (June and again in September) 3. Parent Coordinator provided additional support to address parent questions 4. Guidance Counselor talks to parents about the challenge in transition from Pre-K to Kindergarten and provides strategies that can be used at home. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 48  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Grade teams collaborate to  Review ReadyGen & Go Math, adding strategies for assessing student learning throughout each unit, including tiering tasks and suitable ENL strategies and collaborating to make adjustments where these are agreed upon by teacher teams and supervisors  Devise suitable assessment strategies that are CCLS aligned, both formal and informal such as specific rubrics and checklists tailored to support record keeping and feedback, and other criteria for assessing student performance on specific tasks to allow for actionable feedback  Conduct Inquiry into ways to integrate the professional training on Danielson Domain 3 (3b, 3c & 3d) that best works with their students  Examine the item analysis resulting from the 4 Simulation Tests in ELA and also in Mathematics  Develop suitable strategies to address gaps in student understanding as revealed in the Simulation data  Monitor progress of students in their reading achievement (DRA levels) & work with the DLP provider on strategies to support progress With the support of Instructional Leader, all teachers will individually set specific goals for improving the performance of their students, including grouping practices, refining lesson planning and delivery, etc. Goal setting may also involve individual mentoring, intervisitation and/ or taking on additional professional responsibility such as delivering profession development as pertinent. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Goal 1 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 610,293 X Goal 2 Goal 3 Goal 4 2018-19 CEP 49  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal 35,859 n/a Title III, Immigrant Federal n/a Tax Levy (FSF) Local 4,362,333 n/a X X Goal 5 Goal 1 Goal 2 Goal 3 Goal 4 Goal 5 Goal 1 Goal 2 Goal 3 Goal 4 Goal 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 2018-19 CEP 50  and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 51  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 10X007 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 10X007 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 CEP 52  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g. ESSA/ State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 2018-19 CEP 53   hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) 10X007 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 54   ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to Monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 2018-19 CEP 55    take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child 1. III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 56  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This year our ENL department is excited to launch IReady with our before school ENL morning program. Students in grades 3, 4, and 5 will get the opportunity to take part in ELA and Math activities through interactive learning. This program will run from 7:15am - 8:00am, Wednesdays and Thursdays. ELL newcomers in grades 3 - 5 required to take the mathematics exam will receive additional instruction. Fundations will also be used during this program to support phonics and reading. The ENL Saturday program is open to students in grades 2-5, from 8:30am-11:30am. The program services a variety of ELL's; long term ELL's, new comers, ELL's born in the country, and ELL's that will be tested in ELA and Math. The program is instructed in English and is geared to focus on test preparation for ELA and Math. The Saturday program will provide students with test taking skills as well as content area practice. The after school Academic Success program will run from 2:30-4:30, on Wednesdays and Thursdays beginning early October through late April. ELL's who are testing in both ELA and Math will receive test preparation. Math and ELA materials used to support ELL's in our school programs are IReady, New York Progress, Ready New York, TEAM, Finish Line, and other supplementary material for student's individual needs. The programs will focus on composite competencies and component skills, such as academic language, higher order thinking skills, discussion protocols, and fluency. These materials are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards and are geared to prepare students for the state exams. There are 4 ENL certified teachers that will partake in the programs; Ms. Cano, Ms. Acosta, Mrs. Qarri and Ms. Grela, along with other teachers that have extensive experience with ELL's. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ENL providers attend workshops throughout the year and turn-key information for other staff members. P.S. 7 also invites the ENL services administrator, Jill Schimmel to provide professional development around Advanced Literacy for the ENL population. Some of the upcoming PD's are a two day series on Project Based Learning. Staff members will have access to the Language Allocation Policy so that they will be informed of all the steps taking place to improve instruction for ELL's. Guided Reading professional development goes on throughout the year. Antoinette Jenkins is a guided reading coach from Fountas and Pinnell who provides professional development on how to administer and analyze running records. She also makes bi-weekly visits to the school to monitor the development of guided reading instruction. She 2018-19 CEP 58  Part C: Professional Development presents and models various strategies and skills for guided reading instruction. Teachers not ELL certified will receive professional development at no cost to Title III funds. The focus of the professional development was developed in response to data collected from student work, F & P running records, guided reading instruction, ELA and Math State Assessment, and NYSESLAT results. The teachers will attend PD with the Office of ELLs geared to working with children whom are SIFE and recently arrived to NYC schools. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The parents of ELLs are invited to monthly activities held at the school to help parents and students engage together in activities that will support students acclimate and make language progress.The parents are also invited to on-going workshop sessions in their language to help them understand the expectations and standards their child/ren are expected to accomplish. The teachers of ELLs, Mrs. Acosta, Ms. Cano, Ms. Grela, and Ms. Ramos (Principal) as well as the pedagogical coaches, Mrs. Schmidt and Mrs. Qarri, conduct these sessions. These session are held at different times to accommodate working and busy parents. We will conduct workshops on some Tuesday afternoons during parent communication time, Friday evenings and some on Saturday mornings. Parents will be notified of the events and workshops via flyers, memos, school calendar, PA, and telephone messenger. After every workshop parents will be asked to fill out surveys, During these workshops, the topics discussed have been and will be the following: - Reading to your child at home - Parent Testing Workshop - Questioning during and after Read-Alouds - Playing Educational Games - Experience Testing (ELA & Math State Exams) - English Language Learner Parent Orientation - Simple strategies to help your child learn & make progress Antoinette Jenkins, our guided reading coach from Fountas and Pinnell will provide workshops for parents on Tuesday afternoons from 2:30pm - 3:15pm and Saturday mornings. She will discuss the Fountas and Pinnell assessment process and guided reading with parents. Our Universal Literacy Coach, Elisa Yoo, will be assisting teachers in grade K-2 with fundations. 2018-19 CEP 59 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Milton Fein School Borough Bronx School Number 007 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Miosotis Ramos Coach Hare Qarri ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Rosa Acosta Teacher/Subject Area Lindsey Grela Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Cano/Grade 3 Related-Service Provider Awilda Colon Superintendent Maribel Torres-Hulla Assistant Principal Yolanda Wright Coach Laura Schmidt School Counselor Kelly Links Parent Richard Espinal Parent Coordinator Laurie Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member Brian Schaeffer Other (Name and Title) Jennifer Garcia C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 5 5 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 761 2018-19 CEP 61 Total number of ELLs 171 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.47%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) N/A K 1 4 2 3 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 N/A N/A N/A N/A 9 N/A 10 N/A 11 N/A 12 N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, we will use Fountas and Pinnell. Interim Assessments also provide information on the students’ academic development. The data provided indicates a need for a systematic plan for language development, which guides programmatic and curricular decisions for students until they acquire academic proficiency in English. Many of the beginner and intermediate ELLs, struggle with literacy in English as well as literacy in their native language. The advanced ELLs need additional support in the areas of writing and reading. We also use baseline and simulation assessments to determine levels and most importantly grouping for our differentiated learning groups. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Guided reading groups will prepare students for the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment. We will also use these assessments to identify struggle students as well as higher level students that need to be challenged. RTI will be in place for the struggling students to help target their individual needs for instruction. DLP (differentiated learning periods) are groups 2018-19 CEP 62  with students with similar levels that target needed skills. The after school ENL program is designed to focus on the needs of ELL's on all different levels. Language objectives will be in place along with content area objectives in order for students to develop academic vocabulary. In addition, we will implement a phonics program, Fundations, to target lower grade students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To evaluate the success of our program for ELLs, we analyze the data (NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, Simulations, student work and running records) to determine gains made from one year to the other. We also use simulations, running records and student work to measure progress on a monthly basis. We measure growth or lack of during our monthly ELL team meeting where we focus on looking at student work. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? For children who are in danger of not meeting the standards RTI will be a part of their regular instruction. Students will be involved in intensive guided reading with a focus on academic vocabulary. Lessons will be tiered so all students will reach full potential. For students who are advanced, guided reading and tiered lessons will help them continue to increase their knowledge of vocabulary and proficiency. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data to guide instruction for ELLs is used to differentiate instruction for individual students as well as set up groups for small group instruction. The ELLs are provided with intensive, targeted instruction designed to match their learning needs, as demonstrated by performance on the assessments. Teachers use the item analysis data to target each child's individual needs. That information is also utilized to drive instruction and create groups during the regular school day and after-school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. A number of ELLs who score proficiency in the area of listening & speaking continue to need support in reading & writing. For this reason, these students do not test out. Nonetheless, most of the ELLs need more support in reading & writing than in listening & speaking. We have noticed that the majority, 80% of our ELLs, do well in the speaking and listening modality. However, about the same percentage of students struggle in reading and writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? By looking at the school demographics we are able to plan for the learning needs of the diverse population. Teachers will be engaged in regular individual meetings to review data in order to plan for instruction. The ENL committee provides guidance to the staff on creating lessons that are tiered to meet the students individual needs. The student work committee gathers student work to identify student trends that will help to plan for instruction. Vertical planning will take place during grade meetings and professional development. Upper grade teachers work closely with lower grade teachers in preparing students with important skills needed for the next grade. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 CEP 63  The organizational model used at PS 7 is the push-in model where the classroom and ENL teachers, Rosa Acosta and Hare Qarri work in collaboration to provide language instruction using ENL strategies within the content areas. The groups of students serviced are sometimes heterogeneously or homogeneously grouped depending on the skill, strand, or objective of the lesson. Both teachers strategically plan using formal and informal data to deliver instruction to the targeted group. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable; we do not offer transitional bilingual programs. They are rarely requested by parents. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable; we do not offer dual language programs at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL teachers Mrs. Rosa Acosta and Hare Qarri work with general monolingual teachers providing content instruction to ELL students. The ENL teacher supports in developing students’ English language proficiency by integrating ENL/ESL strategies within content area instruction. The ENL teacher supports ELL students through a push- in model. The ENL teacher plans together with the classroom teachers to ensure curriculum alignment. Language objectives are created to align with content area objectives in order to increase academic language. This program is designed to provide instruction in English with intensive support of ENL strategies and methodologies to develop English language proficiency and acquisition. The results of the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test will determine the units of ENL instruction mandated by CR Part 154. Students are grouped homogeneously or heterogeneously according to levels in modalities as per the NYSESLAT in order to target instruction. We are in the process of planning to hire an additional ENL teacher. 2a. Self-contained classrooms are created for entering and emerging English Language Learners who require 360 minutes of English as a Second Language instruction per week, with a certified TESOL teacher. Transitioning and expanding English Language Learners receive 180 minutes of English as a Second Language instruction as mandated by CR Part 154. Commanding ELLs will continue to receive support for two additional years, 90 minutes of integrated ENL per week, as well as testing accommodations. Guided reading is a regular part of the literacy block that encourages greater use of academic language. We will determine the content areas they need the most support and include ENL services. Although we do not have bilingual programs, to help students transition from their native language to academic English, we provide support(glossaries, translated dictionaries, and library books) in the students' native language to help students meet grade level standards in all content areas. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. When planning content area lessons, teachers focus on both content and language objectives. This includes academic language with visual support. Throughout the lesson, the objectives are supported through specific scaffolding techniques, student engagement, lesson pacing, modeling, and clear and explicit directions. In addition, students are grouped according to their English proficiency levels and the task/activity is differentiated to meet their specific academic levels. Teachers use a variety of techniques to make content concepts clear like modeling, visuals, hands-on activities, demonstrations, gestures, and body language. Teachers also incorporate technology where students engage in interactive activities practicing all four modalities as well as expanding higher order thinking skills. The activities are meaningful and provide language practice opportunities for reading, writing, listening, and/or speaking. It is the teachers' goal to provide content concepts that are appropriate for students' age and educational background. Differentiated/tierd tasks are created within each lesson to allow for multiple points of entry. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language through informal interviews, running records, and the Lab-R. The information this provides is used to inform subsequent teaching and learning activities as well as grouping. 2018-19 CEP 64  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 5a. SIFE Throughout the years, we have witnessed many of our immigrant students come in to our school with very little formal education. These are our “Students with Interrupted Formal Education” (SIFE). This is a very unique population that needs not only language instruction but also intensive academic and cognitive support. In order to support these students, the following academic interventions are in place: • Early diagnostic assessment to determine academic and language proficiency; • Differentiated instruction to allow teachers to meet the individual needs of the students to develop and strengthen areas in need of improvement; • Alignment of instructional materials to the New York State Performance and the ENL standards; • After-School and Supplemental Educational Services ( at school or one-to-one tutoring) will be in place to support students in literacy and in the content areas including English; • Regular assessments and data analysis to monitor the progress of our students in meeting content performance and ENL standards; • English language proficiency will be strengthened through the development of the native language; • Print rich environment with academic language that allows students to make reference to word walls and classroom charts; • The use of Sheltered Instruction will be used as a model where teachers develop a non-threatening environment where students are not afraid of taking a risk with language. 5b. Newcomers ELLS in US schools less than three years, we plan to need special intervention in order to further develop their English language proficiency. This will be accomplished through the following: • Providing students with good models of the English Language; • Engaging students in daily listening, speaking, reading and writing activities; • Promoting accountable talk conversations throughout the day; • Developing the students language in all content areas; • English language proficiency will be strengthened through the development of the native language; materials will be available for parents to connect with students. • The use of vocabulary or grammatical structures will be used to provide easy access to the language; • Various opportunities will be provided to ELLs in order to develop language by promoting accountable talk throughout the day; • Ample opportunities for listening comprehension with contextual support will be provided to our ELL students. * Use of arts, mime, music and other forms will be used to create meaning, as well as the use of the Total Physical Response approach ; * Trips and cultural experiences. • Shared reading and story telling with visual support will be used to support language acquisition; • Lessons will be planned with differentiated instruction in order to account for all levels of language proficiency; * Guided reading will take place during the literacy block to promote academic language. 2018-19 CEP 65  • The use of labels, webs and diagrams to organize information; • Print rich environment that allows students to make reference to word walls and classroom charts; 5c. ELLs receiving services 4 to 6 years Various opportunities will be provided to strengthen all four-language modalities throughout the instructional day; A well planned instructional program with high levels of academic rigor and support; Literacy and learning will be aligned with grade level academic expectations; Explicit vocabulary instruction is accompanied by visual and kinesthetic cues that help students learn academic language; Providers focus on the development of Cognitive Academic Language (CALP) by integrating all 4 ENL modalities, reading, speaking, listening, and writing, into the content areas; All lessons will have a language objective and a content objective that support state standards and learning outcomes; Language objectives will be specific and focus on various aspects of language development such as vocabulary, reading comprehension skills, writing process, functional language, and specific grammar points; The use of questions requiring expanded responses; The use of labels, webs and diagrams to organize information; Print rich environment that allows students to make reference to word walls and classroom charts. 5d. Long term ELLS • Participating in after-school programs in order to provide additional support to targeted students who have not passed the New York State English as a Second Language Test. Each teacher will provide small group instruction to groups of approximately twelve students. A flexible grouping approach is implemented utilizing the results of the NYSESLAT; • All lessons will have a language objective and a content objective that support state standards and learning outcomes; • Language objectives will be specific and focus on various aspects of language development such as vocabulary, reading comprehension skills, writing process, functional language, and specific grammar points; • The use of questions requiring expanded responses; • The use of labels, webs and diagrams to organize information; • Print rich environment that allows students to make reference to word walls and classroom charts. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use a variety of instructional strategies and grade-level materials. Some of the strategies used to make content more comprehensible for ELL-SWDs are scaffolding techniques, bridging, explicit modeling, sentence starters, using visuals, modification of text, small group instruction, guided reading, strategy/skill groups and the use of graphic organizers as a guide or supplement to build background support in literacy and writing. Teachers have classroom libraries organized by levels as well as guided reading texts that are used according to students' reading levels and purpose of the lesson. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment we emphasize differentiation. Although ELL-SWDs are expected to meet the standards, in our curriculum we ensure that we provide strategies on how we can support these students on achieving these goals. In addition, we ensure scheduling flexibility by allowing service providers to collaborate with teachers so that students are not pulled out for services during reading and mathematics. The ENL provider pushes in. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At PS7, we have designed a targeted intervention program for the entire grade 2 through 5 student population called Differentiated Learning Period (DLP). During this time, periods 2 and 3, students are instructed by providers (teachers) in 2018-19 CEP 66  specific targeted areas in literacy and mathematics. Student groups were formed through and by careful analysis of data like state exams, NYSESLAT levels, DRA and running records, ELA and math simulation exams, end of unit assessments and so forth. The English Language Learners are serviced by (AIS), Mrs. Lambert (AIS), Mrs. Acosta (ENL), Ms. Cano(ENL), Ms. Qarri (ENL), and Mrs.Grela (ENL). In addition, ELLs are included and invited to all after-school programs. Through Title III ELLs participate in after-school programs focused on their specific needs according to our data. These interventions are offered in English. Some of our beginner ELLs receive support using their native language to assist with comprehension. ELLs who score commanding on the NYSESLAT continue to receive academic and language development support through small group instruction, academic intervention in specific content areas, rigorous classroom instruction and after-school support. ELLs are afforded the opportunity to participate in all school programs available. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year we will plan improvements according to need based on data. We will hire additional staff , ENL teacher and AIS teacher, to support ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? As we monitor and assess the progress of ELLs, we will make informed decisions regarding implementation of new programs and/or discontinuance of existing ones. Parental choice will play a key factor in planning of programs for English Language Learners. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded the opportunity to participate in all after-school programs. ELLs are invited to after-school programs catered specifically for them and their specific needs. For example, language development programs specifically for beginner ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To support ELLs in all content areas, Time for Kids Grammar Usage and Mechanics, Attanasio & Associates Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and leveled libraries in English and Spanish, RAZ kids (reading computer program), Teacher Created Materials Standards Based Editing, NY Progress Reading and Math, Guided Reading library, Ready Gen, Go Math, On core Mathematics by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt and Finish Line for ELLs are utilized. Additionally, students are exposed to and allowed to practice using technology like the computer and/or Smartboards. for instance, since we have determined that our ELLs require further attention on writing skills, we utilize the grammar books to assist with certain skills concerning writing. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered through the mandated instructional periods of native language arts and through materials that support English as a Second Language acquisition. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ELLs are placed in a classroom setting that matches their age appropriate level and language preference as indicated by Parent Choice Surveys. All ELLs who are eligible for ESL, receive push-in services by our certified ESL teacher, Rosa Acosta. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? To support ELLs in all content areas, Time for Kids Grammar Usage and Mechanics, Attanasio & Associates Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and leveled libraries in English and Spanish, RAZ kids (reading computer program), Teacher Created Materials Standards Based Editing, Ready Gen, Go Math, On core Mathematics by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt and Finish Line for ELLs are utilized. Additionally, students are exposed to and allowed to practice using technology like the computer and/or Smartboards. for instance, since we have determined that our ELLs require further attention on writing skills, we utilize the grammar books to assist with certain skills concerning writing. 2018-19 CEP 67  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At the beginning of the school year newly enrolled ELLs receive an orientation where they are given a tour of the school and are introduced to key people at the school. They will be invited to participate in an after-school program for newly arrived ELLs only. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? An essential part of our English as a New Language Program is our comprehensive professional development component. We strongly believe that the quality of our Free Standing ENL instructional program is shaped by the quality of the teacher; therefore, we provide differentiated professional development for our teachers within and outside of the school. Our entire instructional staff has been involved in ESL coaching sessions where all teachers participate in studying and discussing topics such as: ESL Performance Standards, Developing Literacy Skills in ELL students, Differentiated Instruction to Address the Different Levels of Language Proficiency and Academic Development, Planning Standard-based Lessons infusing ENL strategies, Teaching the Content Areas Through ENL Strategies, providing structured vocabulary instruction, and Developing Spoken Language. We will continue building our teachers’ professional development by engaging teachers in the best research- based teaching practices including scaffolding techniques, and the Principles of Learning of Academic Rigor and Accountable Talk. These principles will be embedded in all instructional plans. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our guidance counselor, Mrs. Links, works with all of our students including the ELLs on issues concerning the transition to Middle School.She also works with all students on respect for all and especially with ELLs concerning issues of arriving to a new school and new country. This school year, teachers will receive support in scaffolding techniques as well as quality teaching for ELLs. These supports will continue throughout the schoool year for all teachers. We will differentiate the support depending on teacher and student need. The training will address the different types of programs for ELLs such as: Bilingual self-contained, transitional bilingual, push-in and pull-out programs. Teachers will have an opportunity to watch the parent video. We will discuss the different compliance issues related to ELLs. Most importantly, we will go into depth about the different methodologies and skills necessary to support ELLs academically. After completion of the training, participants receive a certificate and record of the training is maintained by the personnel secretary, Mrs. Ramos. 2018-19 CEP 68  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At PS 7, we strongly feel that parental involvement is an integral part of a child’s social and academic development. As a result, we make it a priority to include all of the parents in our school community through social and academic events like classroom publishing celebrations. We ensure that the parent’s concerns are addressed and their ideas are validated. We do this through constant communication by allowing parents the opportunity to feel welcomed at the school. We strive to maintain a positive environment that is welcoming to parents with an open door policy. Parent needs are met through regular parent activities such as: • Workshops on how to support and assist children in reading in both their native language and English • Workshops on Math games that support logical thinking • Parent orientation conducted in the parents native language where parents learn about programs for ELLs. * Translation services in Spanish, Arabic and Albanian. Workshops on the new Common Core Learning Standards. Assistance is provided regularly by the school staff to parents for acquiring library cards and providing information about out of school resources, such as tutoring and health and wellness programs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In order to organize and prioritize services and support, we evaluate parent need through surveys provided through the parent association as well as personal communication with our parent coordinator, Assistant Principal, and teachers of ELLs. * Coffee hour with parent coordinator * Regular publishing celebrations * Open House Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Miosotis Ramos, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 7 School DBN: 10BX00 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Miosotis Ramos Title Principal Yolanda Wright Assistant Principal Laurie Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Rosa Acosta ENL/Bilingual Teacher Richard Espinal Parent Jennifer Cano/Grade 3 Teacher/Subject Area L. Grela. Grade 4 Teacher/Subject Area Hare Qarri Laura Schmidt Coach Coach Kelly Links School Counselor Maribel Torres-Hulla Florentino Rosa Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Mr. Rosa Jorge Rodriguez Other IEP/setts teacher Brian Schaeffer Other Assistant Principal Monica Lambert Other Academic Intervention Specialist Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 2018-19 CEP 71  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X007 School Name: Milton Fein Superintendent: Mrs.Hulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Laurie Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During the registration process, the language spoken at home is required as well as the preferred language of oral and written communication is collected. Based on this information we will determine the need for translation of parent letters and information as well as translators for parent-teacher conferences. Additionally, this school year the new ELPC screen regulation for all new comers provided an insight on other languages and parental language communication preference. In the beginning of the school year, we print out the home language report(RHLA) and the School Data Summary Report(RSDS) through ATS to inform us of the varied languages spoken by the families at our school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 72  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian English Spanish Arabic 2 500 225 18 .1% 69% 25% .5% 2 500 225 18 .1% 69% 25% .5% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent-teacher conference announcement, memorandums, entitlement letters, calendars, trip permission slips, celebration invitations, school calendar, progress reports, and after-school invitations. Depending on the document, some are disseminated on a monthly basis like the monthly school calendars; others are disseminated during specific times throughout the school year. Individualized Education Plan Dependent on parent request Reports cards 3 times throughout the year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All pertinent documentation to inform parents of school event will be translated by school personnel. Other documents like Individualized Educational Plans and other legal or extensive documents will be translated by the translation unit or Big word. Requests for translated IEPs will be translated by an official translating company like Big Word will be printed in the language requested by the parent School handbook Disseminated at the beginning of the school year or arrival at the school will be translated into common languages at the school 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 73  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent conferences, parent meetings on Tuesdays, open house, publishing celebrations etc Parent -teacher conferences- September, November, March, May interpretation service(s)? During parent teacher conferences, translators are assigned to translate for Spanish speaking parents. For Arabic speaking parents, individual meetings will be scheduled as we have 1 translator. We will also work with different agencies to provide translation services for parents who speak languages we cannot translate in-house. Kindergarten Orientation meeting June Title 1 Annual Parent meeting November parent workshops Tuesdays and Saturdays In-house personnel In-house translation In-house translation 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Through messenger service we will record detailed emergency messages that will be forwarded in case of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During one of our Monday or Tuesday meetings in September, the staff will receive the information and it will be discussed to ensure understanding. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents are provided with translation on a needs basis. Teachers are aware of the languages of the parents and plan for translation during conferences and meetings. We translate documents as well. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 2018-19 CEP 74  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will use feedback provided by the parents from the various workshops we will conduct throughout the school year. We will also provide parents with surveys at different times throughout the year to help us plan for interesting and important workshops. 2018-19 CEP 75 
