2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X011 School Name: P.S. 011 HIGHBRIDGE Principal: JOAN KONG 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 09X011 P.S. 11 Highbridge 320900010011 Kindergarten, and Grades 1-5 12-57 Ogden Avenue Bronx, NY 10452 718-681-7553 Phone Number: 718-681-7711 Fax: Dr. Joan Kong JKong@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Dr. Joan Kong Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ms. Kelly Cheek-Powell Ms. NereidaFigueroa Ms. Angela Reyes N/A N/A N/A Ms. Marie Stroud District Information Geographical District: 9 Ms. Leticia Rodriguez -Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue Bronx, NY 10456 Superintendent’s Office Address: LRosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-579-7143 Phone Number: 718-410-7017 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlzBronx, NY Joseruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Dr. Joan Kong Ms. Kelly Cheek-Powell Ms. NereidaFigueroa Mr. Jesus Matthews Ms. YahairaFranco N/A N/A Ms. Marie Stroud Ms. Angela Reyes Ms. Jacqueline Payne Ms. Kerry Walsh-King Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. DayanaCardenas Ms. FidelinaMarchenaDe Pena Ms. Lorena Dominguez Ms. YahairaFranco Ms. LashanaPickett Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 11 is committed to working collaboratively to have every student meet or exceed grade level standards in all content areas. We are committed to creating a school that knows no limits to the academic and social success of each student. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We recognize that a school is the anchor of its neighborhood, and that one cannot prosper without the other. To strengthen the school/family/community relationship, we have welcomed, valued, and incorporated families and community into the life of the PS11. We provide our families with information, services, and access to outside resources with targeted academic interventions, after school programs, social services, mental health support and family counseling. The principal has cultivated a highly supportive and inclusive culture that enhances the academic and personal development of staff and students. School leaders and staff consistently communicate high expectations for all to create a culture of mutual accountability for student success. Our students become the stewards of the school. They support each other when faced with difficult moments, they speak up, listen to each others' concerns, and resolve conflicts. All community members have taken a collective responsibility to help students learn, grow, and succeed. All of this work is done in a culture of trust. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have students with disabilities requiring special programs (12:1:1, ICT,and/or Related Services. We also have ELLs in Transitional Bilingual and Dual Language Programs in addition to ELLs serviced by 2 ENL teachers, students in temporary housing (STH) whose needs are met through providing the necessary social-emotional support in addition to providing resources (uniforms, school supplies, etc.). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Teachers at PS 11 are committed to the success of their students in all academic areas. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. The teachers have planned rigorous and coherent curricula and assessments that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS for all students and are modified for identified subgroups in order to maximize teacher instructional practices and student learning outcomes. Trusting relationships have been fostered within the diverse professional learning that has taken place over the course of the 2018-2019 school year. An example of the most successful trust building activity was: Teacher-Share-Fairs, an opportunity where educators came together in partnerships to learn and contribute to the professional learning community. The varied structures used during professional learning sessions gave opportunities for the staff to meet and collaborate horizontally, vertically and across content areas, ensuring that relationships based on trust continued to develop among all members of the school community. Rigorous instruction was achieved through the professional development of school wide initiatives, such as close reading, guided and independent reading, writing from sources and teaching math conceptually. All of these initiatives were aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and allowed all students to develop critical thinking skills as evident by student achievement during the 2018-2019 school year. Our key area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year is to continue to promote rigorous instruction in a supportive environment, as well as, build upon our professional learning. While pedagogy provides consistent instructional 2018-19 CEP 10  supports including the use of strategic entry points and scaffolds to meet the needs of all learners, we will continue to further develop the use of questioning and discussion and the ability to foster structures for student to student development of deep reasoning independent of teacher direction. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X011 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 597 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 70 72 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 91.8% % Reduced Lunch 25.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 72.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.59 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 27.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 72% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 70 68 90.0% 1.0% 22.1% 26.3% 0.0% 0.3% 6 0% 6.5 30.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school’s areas of celebration ratings on our 2017-2018 Quality Review were: *School leaders and teachers ensure that a curriculum aligns to the Common Core Learning Standards and strategically integrate complex text, the citing of evidence, and conceptual learning across all content areas and grades. The vast majority of teachers use student work and data is to refine the curricula, plan daily lessons, and academic tasks. *The curriculum is coherent across all grades and content areas and promotes college and career readiness for all students. Refinements to curricula ensure access and cognitive engagement for all learners including ELLs, students with disabilities, and the lowest and highest achievers. An area that the school will focus on enhancing this year according to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide is: Our math proficiency performance among our self-contained SWDs, our lowest third, and our black and Hispanic males who comprise the lowest third in the city. These students will be the focus of inquiry throughout the year, and we will continue to enhance the math curriculum with Engage NY and other resources. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 13  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, at least 55% students in grades K-5 will increase mathematics proficiency school-wide from a Level 1 to a Level 2 or higher through targeted small group instruction, as measured by the Mathematics Benchmark Assessment. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Coaches will create a time line/calendar of formative and summative assessments including screening, interim measures and progress monitoring. This will begin in October, revisited in December. March and May. Teachers 9/18-6/19 School leaders, UFT Teacher Center coaches, ULIT coach Professional learning will be conducted to train teachers on how to use different forms of assessment. In addition, intensive professional learning opportunities in the areas of analyzing student work and problem solving will be emphasized as part of our school's instructional focus. School leaders, teacher teams, coaches The school will conduct regular parent outreach meetings to assist parents in understanding the CCLS standards and assessments. Families will learn how to use assessment data to monitor their child’s progress and support their child with strategies at home. Meetings will be held every month. Parents of all students, parents of ELL’s, SWD’s and high need students 9/18-6/19 Bi-weekly during teacher team meetings. 9/18-6/19 Teachers, school leaders, teacher teams, UFT Teacher Center coaches, ULIT coach, borough support staff and outside consultants Classroom teachers, parent coordinator, ENL Coordinator, PA, support personnel, UFT Teacher Center coaches, ULIT coach, and school leaders In October 2018 all teachers will identify an inquiry group which they will meet with at least 2-3 times a week focusing on teaching targeted math strategies. Students 10/18-6/19 Teachers, UFT-TC coaches ULIT coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 15  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We continue to offer information sessions and workshops for parents and families on a monthly basis to engage parents/families on every aspect of school life. The monthly information sessions/workshops are facilitated by the parent coordinator, two UFT Teacher Center Coaches, Universal Literacy Coach, and the two ENL teachers. In addition, teachers meet with parents every Tuesday to share information about curriculum and student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Opportunities will be provided for administrators and teachers to engage in professional development with District personnel, Teachers Center Instructional Coaches and other outside consultants. 2. Teachers from each grade will attend professional development and turnkey to grade teams. 3. Scheduled time for teacher teams to meet collaboratively during the day. 4. Per diem funds will be used to hire substitute teachers whenever teachers attend professional development. 5. Eureka Math/Engage NY Math materials, Go Math resources, additional mathematics resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June of 2019, 26% of students will demonstrate mathematics proficiency across all grades levels by increasing their proficiency level from a Level 1 to a Level 2, as measured by the Mathematics Midyear Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure used to assess progress will be the Mathematics Baseline and Midyear Assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school’s strengths as areas of celebration on our 2017-2018 Quality Review and the qualities of well developed practices include: *Multiple structures allow for outreach and partnership with parents including allocated time every Tuesday afternoon for families to meet with teachers, monthly parent meetings with the principal, family reading and math nights four times per year, Class Dojo, and parent association workshops that model ways to help children at home. Parents reported that they communicate with teachers often, and that the guidance counselor, family worker, and parent coordinator are consistently helpful and available. Faculty and staff communicate and conduct outreach to families in English and Spanish as needed. Parent outreach topics include, understanding student data reports, practicing strategies to support reading at home, and learning and playing math games that teach skills aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. *School leaders and staff effectively collaborate with families to support student progress through fourth and fifth grade, in preparation for the transition to middle school. Faculty begins communicating with families about middle school in the fourth grade. For example, faculty invite parents to a November workshop on middle school applications to support their understanding of the process and how student progress in fourth grade affects middle school applications. Parents reported that they have a better understanding of middle school options, as well as, the importance of student achievement in fourth grade in successfully transitioning to a 2018-19 CEP 17  school of their choice. An area that the school will continue to sustain as a well developed rating this year is: Teachers, paraprofessionals and other school staff will continue to demonstrate equitable practices in responding to students’ academic, social and emotional developmental needs through collaboration with parents. The school community will continue to meet the ever-changing needs of individual students while maintaining a positive, culturally responsive, and a safe environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 3% in student attendance by fostering student engagement through an increase in project based learning opportunities as measured by the RSAC School Statistical Report. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration, parents, parent coordinator, teachers, guidance counselor, social worker, coaches  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All stakeholders will plan multiple enrichment activities such as: All students 9/18-6/19 *STEAM Fair *Monthly Attendance Recognition *Art Exhibits(student-led) *Culminating Learning Celebrations *Holiday Plays/Celebrations *Mathematics Competitions *Cultural Celebrations *Spelling Bees *Computer Science for All(CS4All) activities *Reading Challenges *Content Fridays *Clubs(Green Team, soccer) *Student Council Teachers and paraprofessionals will continue to Teachers participate in professional development opportunities to Paraprofessionals meet students’ academic, social and emotional needs September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Teacher Center Coaches, IEP team, related service providers, teachers, parent coordinator, 2018-19 CEP 19 guidance counselor, social worker Weekly Bi-Weekly Monthly throughout the year. These professional development sessions will continue during weekly Teacher Team meetings, Monday Professional Learning Sessions, Special Education meetings, one-to-one support sessions, and New Teacher Mentoring and/or outside workshops, i.e. Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Services (TCI). Topics will include but are not limited to: Specially Designed Instruction, PBIS, FBAs, BIPs, Quality IEPs, RtI, Differentiation, De-escalation and Crisis Intervention Techniques. Paraprofessionals will continue to be supported in the collection and analysis of data and behavior modification strategies and techniques. School Aides will continue to participate in a series of School Aides Leadership Training sessions conducted by the Parent Coordinator, to enhance relationship skills, leadership abilities and professional competence. The sessions will Jan 2019-May 2019 Parent Coordinator Social worker 2 times a year include topics such as: Conscious Choice Rather Than Guidance counselor Emotional Response; Real Listening; and Assertive Communication. Parents will continue to be provided with information sessions and workshops to support their child’s academic, social, emotional and health throughout the year. Topics will include but are not limited to: Autism, Parents of students with IEPs, Health and Nutrition, CCLS, and LGBTQ information, Middle School Articulation Parents Principal, parent coordinator, guidance department, ELL coordinator, Teacher Center Coaches and school nurses Sept 2018-June 2019 Bi-Weekly Monthly 2018-19 CEP 20  Programs such as PBIS, RtI, No Place for Hate will Students provide social-emotional support and promote attendance for all students. RtI Team, Social worker, guidance counselor, teachers, No Place for Hate Committee Sept 2018-June 2019 Weekly Bi-Weekly Monthly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will continue to be provided with information sessions and workshops to support their child's academic, social, emotional and health throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Topics will include but are not limited to: Autism, Parents of students with IEPs, Health and Nutrition. The parent coordinator, social worker and guidance counselor will lead these meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Administration, Coaches, IEP Team, Related Services Providers, Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator 2. Before and After School programs and activities 3. Professional Learning Sessions, Share Fairs, Professional Development Days, Monthly Parent Informational sessions; one to one support, Mentoring periods, Special Education meetings 4. Substitutes teachers to provide coverage while teachers attend outside professional development. 5. Daily schedule will be adjusted to accommodate professional development for staff members during the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 3 professional learning opportunities to support students' academic, social, and emotional needs will be provided for all stakeholders as evidenced by agendas, sign in sheets, and professional learning reflection sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the school-created PS 11X Incident Reporting Form to monitor and support students’ academic, social, emotional and health needs throughout the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school’s strengths as areas of celebration according to our 2017-2018 Quality Review include: *The vast majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based collaboration on grade level and vertical teams. Distributed leadership is embedded through structured teacher teams and school committees. *Collaborations strengthen the instructional capacity of teachers, promote the Common Core Learning Standards and result in school-wide instructional coherence and increased student achievement for all learners. There is effective teacher leadership and teachers play an integral role in key curricular decisions that affect student learning across the school. In order to maintain the rating of well developed, the teachers will continue to engage in grade level teams to analyze student work for specific groups of students with a content area focus. Teachers will be engaged in grade level teams as well as vertical teams that use protocols and annotation strategies to analyze student work and make changes to instruction. As all grades continue to implement the Engage NY curriculum in math, teacher teams will focus on improving conceptual understanding through problem solving. Lesson plans and lessons across grade levels reflect the integration of conceptual problem solving in math instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 23  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 weekly inquiry-based teacher teams will refine and enhance the analysis of student work through the use of professional protocols. This will result in shared improvement in teacher practice, school-wide instructional coherence, and a 3-5% decrease in students scoring a Level 1 on the New York State Mathematics Exam. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams will engaged in at least 3 cycles of inquiry during the 2018-2019 school year, analyzing the results of the assessment data for their inquiry students, and identified grade trends and best practices that promote achievement for all learners. All students (including ELLs, SWDs) 9/18- 6/19 Weekly Classroom teachers, support personnel, UFT TC coaches, ULIT coach, and school leaders Targeted guided math groups will provide additional support for all struggling students, including ELLs and SWDs. Lesson plans provide multiple points of entry for groups of students to promote high levels of student engagement and inquiry. Technology programs (Imagine Learning, Raz Kids, and i-Ready) provide interventions and enrichment for all students. ELL’s and SWD’s, struggling readers, all students 9/18-6/19 Weekly The use of the Inquiry Model will support teachers in moving small groups of students in the area of mathematics. The practices learned and used with the inquiry groups will improved overall teacher practice, which will lead to increased student achievement. Parents of ELL’s, SWD’s and high need students 9/18-6/19 Monthly Regular parent outreach meetings will be held to assist parents: understand the CCLS standards, ESSA; use assessment data to monitor their child’s progress and support their child with strategies at home. Continued opportunities for teacher teams to analyze student work to guide daily instruction. All teachers 9/18 - 6/19 Weekly Classroom teachers, support personnel, paraprofessionals, parents, UFT TC coaches, ULIT coach, and school leaders Classroom teachers, parent coordinator, PA, support personnel, UFTTC coaches, ULIT coach, and school leaders Classroom teachers, school leaders, UFT TC coaches, and ULIT coach 2018-19 CEP 25  Continual targeted, differentiated instruction across all content areas based on students' individual needs. Continual actionable feedback to support students in articulating and taking action toward their next steps. Continued opportunities for teachers to participate in the inquiry process utilizing professional protocols. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Regular parent outreach meetings will be held to: *assist parents in understanding the CCLS standards, Eureka Math/Engage NY Modules and assessments *how to monitor their child's progress *support their children with strategies at home. The outreach meetings will be facilitated by teachers, parent coordinator, two UFT Teachers Center Coaches, and the Universal Literacy Coach. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Supporting mathematics materials will be purchased as funds become available. 2. Opportunities will be provided for administrators and teachers to engage in professional development with the District, Teacher Center Instructional Coaches, Special Education Liaison, and outside consultants. 3. Teachers from each grade will attend professional development and turnkey to grade teams. 4. Scheduled time for teachers teams to meet during the school day to plan lessons. 5. Per diem funds will be used to hire substitute teachers whenever teachers attend professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 26  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The Math Baseline will provide an initial data point to monitor the progress of all students. At the end of January 2019, a Mid-Year Assessment will be compared with the September 2018 baseline assessment to allow school leaders and teachers to make pivotal decisions to ensure continuous improvement in mathematics for all learners. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid and End of Module Assessments from Eureka Math, Teacher created assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school strengths based on the 2017-2018 Quality Review are: *School leaders support the development of teachers by providing effective feedback and next steps from frequent cycles of observation that incorporate student work and data into development practices. Feedback reflects strengths, areas for growth, and next steps using the Danielson Framework for Teaching. *Feedback to teachers articulates clear expectations for improvements in teacher practice and provides aligned resources that promote professional growth and reflection. An area that the school will continue to focus on this year is: The school leader and other school administrators will monitor the plan for observing teachers and use observation data and other measures of teacher effectiveness to assign/reassign, counsel, and provide on-going targeted professional development opportunities in multiple formats (e.g., coaching, mentoring, peer support) to staff. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will provide on-going, targeted, differentiated, professional development for all teachers. This will result in a 7% increase (from 80% to 87%) in the number of teachers who will agree or strongly agree that the 2018-19 CEP 28  principal/school leader at their school sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development, as measured by the results of the 2018-2019 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders will continue to use the teacher evaluation system (Advance) to examine trends of highly effective, effective, and developing teacher practices and make programmatic and professional learning decisions and adjustments to improve teacher planning and practice over 4 cycles. School Leaders Coaches Teachers Data trends from Advance, feedback to teachers, and student assessments will continue to be analyzed and disaggregated to determine professional learning needs for teachers of ELLs, SWDs and the bottom 1/3. After each observation teachers receive written, actionable feedback with ways to improve their practice. This is done formally and informally. School Leaders Data Specialist Coaches Teachers of ELLs, Sp. Ed, GE and Students in the bottom 1/3 Coaches, school leaders, external support Coaches, school leaders, external support Cycle 1: 9/6/18 - 11/2/18 Cycle 2: 11/5/18 - 1/8/19 Cycle 3: 1/8/19 - 3/5/19 Cycle 4: 3/12/19 - 5/14/19 Cycle 1: 9/7/18 - 11/6/18 Cycle 2: 11/11/18 - 1/8/19 Cycle 3: 1/14/19 - 3/8/19 Cycle 4: 3/11/19 - 5/17/19 2018-19 CEP 30  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School leaders, teachers and support personnel will share student data with families on a regular basis. Parents will have the opportunity to met with teachers and support personnel during weekly Parent Engagement sessions to understand ways to support their children at home. The parent coordinator will provide training for parents in the PS 11 Parent Academy to empower them to support and advocate for their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Opportunities will be provided for administrators and teachers to engage in professional development with District personnel, Teachers Center Instructional Coaches and other outside consultants. 2. Teachers from each grade will attend professional development and turnkey to grade teams. 3. Scheduled time for teacher teams to meet collaboratively during the day. 4. Per diem funds will be used to hire substitute teachers whenever teachers attend professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 50% of teachers will be rated as effective or higher in the observable Danielson Rubric component 1a: Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy and 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction in the Advance system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Data Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school’s strengths as evidence by the qualities of well developed practices according to the 2017-2018 Quality Review are: *School leaders consistently communicate high expectations around instruction, professionalism, and communication to the entire staff. Leaders and staff consistently communicate with families via meetings, family nights, and workshops to promote a path to college and career readiness for students. *Training for staff and the share fair structure have resulted in a culture of mutual accountability where teachers support and hold each other accountable for student learning. The school successfully partners with families to understand and support student progress towards expectations. An area that the school will continue enhance to sustain a well developed rating this year is: As measured by the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, 59% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will provide a minimum of 6 opportunities for parents to volunteer in the school, which will result in a 10% increase (from 59% to 69%) in the percentage of parents who will agree or strongly agree that since the 2018-19 CEP 32  beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school sometimes or often. Parent responses will be measured by the results of the 2018-2019 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Student data will be shared with families in a way that they can understand a child's learning needs and success by school leaders, teachers and support personnel. The Parent Coordinator will provide training for parents in the PS 11 Parent Academy to become familiar with NYCDOE websites and webinars. This will allow parents to partner with the school to provide appropriate student support. Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration, teachers, parent coordinator, SLT members, PA Parents will continue to be informed of and actively involved in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on/as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community on the following: Parents Sept.2018-June 2019 Administration, teachers, parent coordinator, SLT members, PA *School Leadership Team *Parent Association *Title I Parent Committee *Class Parents *Parent Volunteers *College/Career Day Speakers *Classroom Helpers *Reading Partners *Mentors Parents will meet on Tuesday afternoons, with teachers and support personnel to engage in dialogue to help parents Teachers, students, parents Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administration, teachers, coaches, 2018-19 CEP 34  understand data and ways in which to support their child's achievement. Through a monthly Principal Round-table session, all parents have an open forum to contribute ideas, ask questions or seek clarity from the principal. Parent Coordinator, students Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, parents, Parent Coordinator Monthly Principal Round-table session dates (October-May 3rd Monday of the month) Monthly workshops for parents on various topics (SWDs, ELLs, discipline code, STH, health, guidance and counseling) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents 9/18 - 6/19 Counselors, parent coordinator, teachers, nurse, social worker, ELL coordinator, SIT team, If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Community Based Organizations that support families in the school communities include: Astor Services for Family and Children, Catholic Charities (Mosaic Beacon), Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center-Children's Crisis Services, and Bridge Builders. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Parent Coordinator 2. Parent Association 3. Principal 4. Supervisors 5. Teachers-substitute teachers are used to cover classes. 6. Guidance Department Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 35  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will provide at least 3 opportunities for parents to volunteer their time in the school on a continuous basis as evidenced by agendas, sign-in sheets, and parent outreach log. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. School-wide Parent Engagement/Satisfaction Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grade 3- Group 1 Students with IEPs((ELL’s included). Grade 4-Students with IEPs(ELL’s included) Grade 5-Students with IEPs(ELL’sincluded) Grade 3- Students with IEPs(ELL’s included) Grade 5-Students with IEPs(ELL’s included) Embedded into Literacy Program and ReadyGen Units of Study Embedded into Literacy Program and ReadyGen Units of Study At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) The students being serviced are considered at risk. Tier II and Tier III interventions are Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group During the school day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Small group, Guided Reading Strategy lessons that are aligned to CCLS within the ReadyGen Units of Study Small Group aligned to the CCLS within the GoMath Program Small Group During the school day Strategy lessons that are aligned to CCLS within the ReadyGen Science Units of Study Strategy lessons that are aligned to CCLS within the ReadyGen Social Studies Units of Study No Place for Hate Committee, Respect for All, Crisis Small Group During the school day Small Group During the school day Small Group During the school day 2018-19 CEP 37  provided. Social Work and Guidance support. Intervention, At risk counseling Before the school day 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 50 students 1. School supplies 2. Uniforms 3. Glasses 4. Books 5. At-Risk Support and counseling from the Guidance Department. 6. Intervention programs (before and after school) 7. Continued support from the school and shelter family workers Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS 11 staff members trust and respect each other to collaborate on an optimal environment for professional learning and professional responsibilities. P.S. 11 has experienced little turnover in their staff. Anticipated openings are filled through teacher hiring fairs and Teacher Finder. To ensure retention of highly qualified teachers, PS 11 has established a community of support and open communication that allows teachers to take risks and work collaboratively. School administration builds capacity by encouraging teacher leaders to share their expertise in professional development sessions and teacher Share Fairs. The BEDS survey indicates that 100% of our teachers are assigned under the appropriate teaching license ensuring that they are highly qualified based on HQT criteria. First-year teachers and teachers with a developing or ineffective rating are provided with mentoring. There are two UFT Teacher Center Instructional Coaches, a Universal Literacy Coach, and an Early Reading Matters Coach that provide differentiated professional development for new and experienced teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). PS 11 administrators have hired consultants and two Teacher Center Instructional Coaches to ensure that all students are provided with a curriculum that is CCLS aligned in all subjects and that all teachers are provided with differentiated on-going professional development to address their specific needs. In addition, we have partnered with the NYC Universal Literacy Coaches Program, Early Reading Matters Program, and G&R Inclusive Group to build capacity within our school by training teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 CEP 41  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The school based support team at PS 11 collaborates with preschools to gather any records and information about students as they are admitted. If a child had early intervention services they are re-evaluated and services are implemented at the school. We provide opportunities for preschool students and families to visit the school, meet staff members, and learn about the curriculum. Emotional and social support is provided to new kindergarten students by the guidance team. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. There are committees in place such as the Assessment Committee, Teacher Teams, RtI Team, SIT and Professional Learning Committee, that reach out to their constituent groups to collaborate before they select appropriate assessments and professional learning ideas and strategies to improve instruction. We are providing a series of professional development sessions around the iReady program to use the diagnostic assessment results to improve instruction. Our professional development sessions for the 2018-2019 school year will be focused on analyzing formative and summative assessment data to provide differentiated and targeted instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 CEP 42  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 653,814.00 218,713.00 23,886.00 0 3,969,534.00 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5B, 5A 5B, 5D, 5E 5D, 5E x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 CEP 43  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 11, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 11 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● feedback/evaluation at post-workshop/parent conversations School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 11, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2018-19 CEP 47  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 49  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At PS 11, part of our mission is to help every student meet and exceed grade- level standards in all content areas by providing them with a challenging curriculum that is driven by data and instructional goals. We extend that philosophy beyond the school day. To ensure that our second through fifth grade ELLs are successful, we used the following data points to identify students who would benefit from additional instructional support: 1. NYSESLAT - We identified the students who scored Emerging, Entering, and Transitioning 2. New York State English Language Arts and Mathematics Exams - English Language Learners that were identified as scoring in the lowest 1/3 on either or both exams. 3. Teachers College Running Records - We identified ELLs who were reading at least two levels below their grade "Additional instructional time is dedicated to ensure that each student is provided with strategies needed to be successful. English Language Learners in second thorough fifth grade who have recently entered school from another country or those who scored Entering or Emerging on the NYSESLAT were invited to join a before school Imagine Learning Program. The program is held every Monday through Thursday, October 2018 - June 2019, for 121 sessions, from 7:30 am - 8:15 am. Since Imagine Learning in a technology based program, the one ENL -certified teacher is able to provide instruction to 20 students through the use of i-Pads. Each individual student works on their individual devices and the teacher is able to work with groups of 3-4 students at a time on particular language skills and strategies. The teacher keeps attendance and student records in a binder daily. Communications to parents is thorough letters, emails, and phone call. Communication is done either in English or Spanish. The Imagine Learning provides strategic first-language support to facilitate and enhance English Language learning. As students become more proficient in English, this language support gradually fades, preparing students for English-only environments. In addition to strategic translations, the program also uses peer modeling to illustrate concepts more clearly. Same-age peers explain what words and phrases mean in rich, contextualized examples. By seeing real children use key vocabulary in real-life settings, ELLs are more engaged, which helps them understand each concept more fully. Imagine Learning also provides scaffolded practice-including front-loaded vocabulary, graphic organizers, and glossary words with translations to support ELLs at every step. All third through fifth grade students who were identified as English Language Learners will participate in the After School ELL Enrichment Program. The language of instruction is English. First, the program explicitly teaches the conventions of Standard English to help students communicate their written ideas with clarity and correctness. In addition, the program provides intense test sophistication strategies to ensure student success when taking the ELA, Mathematics, and NYSESLAT exams. The program will be offered on Wednesdays and 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Thursdays, for 35 sessions, from 2:50 pm-5:00 pm in English. from November 5, 2018 - April 18, 2019. The program will be taught by three certified Bilingual/ENL teachers. Each class will have a maximum of 15 students per teacher. The three after school classes will have students grouped based on the NYSESLAT data. Students who scored Entering or Emerging will be one class, those who are identified as Transitioning will be in one class and the third class will be students who scored Commanding and Former ELLs. During the program, attendance and all assessment data will be compiled and kept in a binder by the individual after school teacher. A duplicate of all records and data will be kept by the supervisor of the program. After analyzing school data, it is evident that many of our ELLs have been at the same proficiency level (Transitioning) for 2 or more years. Though their listening and speaking modalities scores have increased, there has been little such growth in reading and writing. Therefore, reading comprehension and writing to respond to a prompt will be the emphasis in these classes. We believe that small group, targeted instruction with a focus on the format of the NYSSESLAT exam will increase students' proficiency levels. The instructional academic language materials that are being purchased and will be used include : *Ready NYCCLS English Language Arts and Mathematics Textbooks *Teacher Created Materials: Language Power - Levels A-C kit and student guides. *The Engage New York Annotated 3-8 ELA and Mathematics State Test questions from 2013-2018. *Continental's New York ELLs workbooks/Attanasio's Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In order to ensure that our teachers at PS 11 are current with ELL strategies and research-based scaffolds and routines that will improve linguistic and academic student outcomes,we will offer professional development to our Bilingual/ENL Coordinator/Provider and the ENL Provider who provide push-in and pull-out services to our ELL students. In addition, our nine Bilingual/ENL certified teachers will be provided with weekly professional development of which, 50% of the PD topics will be about ELL pedagogy and instruction. The professional development will occur from September - June, once a month on Mondays during the dedicated Professional Learning time, from 2:40 - 4:00pm. The topics that will be covered : * Blueprint - Framework and Expectations *Analysis of the NYSESLAT modalities *How the NYSESLAT Can Drive Instruction * Language Progressions * Connecting ELLs with The Common Core Learning Standards * Building Academic Literacy for Bilingual Students with Disabilities * Differentiating Instruction within levels of Proficiencies *Scaffolding Techniques to Teach Academic Vocabulary * Ideas and Activities to Promote Classroom Interaction and Practice Application for ELLs 2018-19 CEP 54  Part C: Professional Development * NYSESLAT - Looking at Social Studies and Science Themes These professional development will be held in collaboration with the UFT teacher center coaches, the Teaching Matters coach, the Universal Literacy coach and facilitators from: Bronx Borough Field Support Center, NYC Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network (Fordham University) and the office of DELLSS . Title III money will be used for consultants providing training to teachers as well as materials purchased through the workshops to support ELLs.. Agendas and sign in sheets will be collected as a record of attendance and evidence of workshops conducted. In addition to the planned school PD, the Title III LEP teachers will meet once per month for approximately and hour and a half for planning and assessing students progress Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with families of ELLs and community stakeholders so that ELL students' strengths and needs are identified and used to augment learning. The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning needs and successes and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. We have established and continue to maintain strong partnerships with families and community members, and continue to provide a variety of support for parents such as: Parents are welcome to listen to daily Town Hall Announcements. These pledges along with the principal’s message set the tone for a productive, positive and safe day and week. The Town Hall serves to: communicate high expectations; acknowledge accomplishments of students; share student learning, celebrate successes and address concerns as needed. We continue working in partnership with community agencies and organizations to support students’ social and emotional developmental health. We maintain partnerships with: Bridge Builders (Kinship Foster Program and Legal Advice), Highbridge School Coalition (Community Services), Highbridge Voices, Catholic Charities Beacon Program, Astor Services for Children and Families, Lincoln Hospital Crisis Center, and the Bronx Mobile Crisis Unit. Agencies are invited to Parent Associations Meetings to provide parents with information. We continue to offer information sessions and workshops for parents and families on a monthly basis to engage parents/families on every aspect of school life. The monthly information sessions/workshops are facilitated by the Parent Coordinator, Guidance Department and the School Nurse. Some of the 2018-19 CEP 55  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities topics are: Bullying, The Discipline Code, Students in Temporary Housing (STH), English Language Learners, No Place for Hate, Nutrition, Shared Pathways to Success. The Principal holds a monthly Parent Round Table meeting the third Tuesday of each month to encourage parents of ELLs to express concerns and suggestions for school improvements The school will share data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning needs and successes and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Agendas and sign-in sheets are collected as a record of these meetings. Translation services are provided by the Parent Coordinator, ENL Provider, or Bilingual/ENL Coordinator. At PS 11, we have created an environment that engages parents in order to give them a more active and participatory role in the linguistic and academic development of their children. We begin this as early as the registration process and through instructional and academic workshops given throughout the school year. We also conduct Dual Language /ENL monthly parent meetings. The Dual Language Teachers double up in a classroom during the Parent Teacher Conferences to engage the parents of both classes. During our upcoming Parent Conversations/Conferences held in September, November, March and May, we will hand out to parents of ELLs a parent survey. This survey will help us assess the needs of parents and help us determine what services the school can provide to support them. Based on the needs of the parents, we will then structure a program that is reflective of their needs. Our intentions is to initially offer an Adult ENL class on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 3:00pm - 5:00pm beginning in December 2017. Due to overwhelming requests from our PS 11X parents, the Parent Academy was moved to Saturday from 9:00am-12:00pm. The program will continue to be held on Saturdays from 9:00am-12:00pm during the 2018-2019 school year. As the ENL class continues, we intend to invite guest speakers and community based organizations in 3 sessions held in January 2019, March 2019, and June 2019 to attend and share information about the following topics: *Physical and mental health services in the community *Establishing and maintaining a supportive home learning environment *Communicating and collaborating with teachers, counselors, and principals *Navigating the school system and accessing its resources *Identifying and avoiding obstacles to school success *Support children's emotional and social development The Parent Coordinator, ENL Provider, Bilingual/ENL Coordinator will be available to provide language translation services. We are looking into various partners as potential collaborators including: Fordham University and Astor Services for Children and Families. Parents will be notified in English, Spanish, and French of the Adult ENL class via letters, flyer's and during the monthly General PA meetings. Records such as agendas, letters, flyer's and sign-in sheets will be maintained by the Bilingual/ENL supervisor. 2018-19 CEP 56 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name The Highbridge School Borough Bronx School Number 011 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Joan Kong Coach Ms. Elvira Gonzalez ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Angela Reyes Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Mayra Mendez Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Irma Beltre-Vasquez Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Assistant Principal Henrietta Sirleaf Coach Ms. Marianne Minnich School Counselor Ms. Ana Del Rosario Parent Ms. Nereida Figueroa Parent Coordinator Ms. Nelida Sousa Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 5 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 558 2018-19 CEP 58 Total number of ELLs 136 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 24.37%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 Lang. SP SP SP SP SP SP Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 5 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 5 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools that our school uses are the, Spanish LAB-R, Estrellita, Fundations, Teacher's College Reading and Writing Workshop formal running records, teacher-created assessments, and conferring notes. After reviewing various sources of data, our ELLs struggle with: *understanding of grade level texts *answering text dependent questions *knowledge of Tier2 words *command of Standard English Conventions 2018-19 CEP 59  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures in place to support this effort is after the collection of data it is utilized to plan and drive instruction as well as to identify students who will need extra support and intervention. The data also helps us when planning Academic Intervention Services, make curriculum decisions, and plan after school programs and if need be morning programs as well. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The summative assessments being used to identify baseline in ELA are: * PS 11 ELA Unit Performance Tasks for Grades K-5 * NYC ELA BOY, MOY and EOY Performance Tasks K-5 * I-ready BOY, MOY and EOY Assessments for Grades K-5 * TCWRP Assessments for Grades K-5 * On Demand Writing Prompts * Fundations end of unit assessments for grades K-2 * Home Language Arts Performance Task (Spanish) Beginning of the Year/End of Year Grades K-5 In Math are: * Engage NY Middle and End if the Module Assessments for Grades K-5 * NYC Math BOY, MOY and EOY Performance Tasks K-5 * I-ready BOY, MOY and EOY assessments for Grades K-5 We measure the progress using rubrics with traits and standards. ELA - we use traits and for Math- we use standards to measure progress. Areas of need are in understanding grade level texts, answering text dependent questions, knowledge of Tier 2 words and command of Standard English Conventions. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered is to use it to drive instruction and form small group instruction to those who are in need of it. Classroom teachers meet with small groups of students that are under performing at least 3 times per week to address specific needs of these under performing students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At PS 11 we use various data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework. We use New York State ELA results, New York State Math results, ELL Periodic Assessments, formal and informal assessments and student IEPs. There are three tiers in the RtI framework: Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3. At Tier 1, the classroom teacher will be supported with research based ideas to deliver effective Tier 1 instruction. At Tier 2, small group interventions are adjusted to help the student overcome his/her difficulties with the help of school support staff. At Tier 3, intensive and individualized intervention is given to help the student overcome his/her difficulties. Progress monitoring is done to track student progress. At PS 11, the RtI team looks at the results of the universal screener (Fountas and Pinnell Running Record Assessment) and identifies targeted students to focus on for the school year. They also take recommendations from teachers. Before a student is brought to the RtI team, the teacher must provide documentation of at least 3 types of interventions that have been tried on a consistent basis with the student and the results of these interventions. In addition, the teacher must provide evidence of class work, projects, assessments that the student has completed. If it is behavioral intervention that is requested, the mandates are the same. The team then meets and consults with the teacher to decide on the best intervention(s) for the student. Depending on the level of the intervention, the team recommends Tier 2 interventions that provide support but also ensures that there is as little interference with the student’s regular academic day as possible. The intervention is tried consistently for a specific period of 6 weeks, the results are documented, the students’ progress is monitored, and the teacher meets with the team at the end of the cycle to share the results. Based on these results, the team creates an action plan for next steps. This may include continued or adjusted Tier 2 intervention for an additional 6 weeks or depending on the student's results, a move to Tier 1 intervention if the student is making little to no progress. 2018-19 CEP 60  We also offer other support services for those ELLs who score below specified levels of performance on the NYSESLAT by taking into consideration the following: number of years in TBE or English as a New Language program, English and home language literacy, content area and socio-emotional support needs of SIFE, TBE, ENL, content area teachers recommendations, parent request , samples of student work and a bilingual educational evaluation if student has or is suspected of having a disability. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessments data that are used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs are: NYSESLAT, ELA and Math Exams. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structures in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to our programs is Engage NY, Bilingual Common Core Progressions - New Language Arts and Home Language Arts Progressions. We also look at the ELL Data Analysis Tool to be able to target instructional programs that will accelerate achievement among ELLs and non-ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our Freestanding ENL Program provides instruction to a group of students using content-based thematic instruction focusing on both content and language objectives. The stand alone model is implemented by the ENL teacher working with a small group from the same grade with the same proficiency level focusing on vocabulary and/or content that will help them in their classroom lessons. With our integrated model the ENL teacher works alongside the classroom teacher in planning, incorporating ENL strategies and differentiation techniques. The ENL teacher will be provided with at least the Text, Task and Standard to work with the students. The Integrated model will be provided through duet teaching, parallel teaching and/or shadow teaching depending on the lesson being taught. In this model, the students are of mixed proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. The TBE program at PS 11 is only in fifth grade. The TBE program maintains consistency in content learning with a focus on literacy and language development. The teachers are certified bilingual teachers. The students are grouped heterogeneous. Students at the Entering/Emerging level of language proficiency receive the mandated 360 minutes per week which includes 180 minutes of stand alone and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. The Transitioning level will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. The Expanding level will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA content area. The Commanding level will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.. Students in the TBE also receive one period per day of Native Language Arts, and two content area in NLA as per Commissioner's Regulations CR Part 154 mandates. c. DL program. If applicable. The Dual Language program at PS 11 runs from kindergarten through fourth grade. It also focuses on literacy and language development. The classes in each grade are self-contained. These classes are grouped heterogeneous from kindergarten through fourth grade. Students at the Entering level of language proficiency receive the mandated 360 minutes per week which includes 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. The Emerging level receives 360 minutes which includes 90 minutes of standalone and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. The Transitioning level students receives 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and the Expanding 2018-19 CEP 61  level students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or content area. Commanding level receive 90 minutes of ENL/ELA or content area. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In our Freestanding ENL Program and TBE, all students in Entering and Emerging levels receive two units of ENL (360 minutes), students in Transitioning and Expanding levels receive one unit (180 minutes) and Commanding students receive 90 minutes, as per CR Part 154 by a certified ENL teacher or bilingual teacher, as per NYSED's required units of instruction. Also, students in the TBE classrooms receives one period per day of NLA instruction in Spanish and two content areas in Spanish. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At P.S. 11 content areas are infused throughout the entire school day . During the literacy block in the ENL classes, the language of instruction is English where as in the TBE classes, instruction is delivered according to English proficiency levels. TBE class in fifth grade receive 2 periods of English Language Arts and 1 period of Native Language Arts and Social Studies is taught in Spanish. Math alternates in English and Spanish. Teachers use visual representation, modeling and other scaffolding strategies to make content comprehensible and enrich language development. Our classroom libraries include diverse levels based on theme, interest, and genre. The TBE classroom libraries also contain content area books in the students' native language (Spanish). Content Area in TBE classes is delivered in Spanish and in the ENL program in English. Our Social Studies curriculum is Passport and it adheres to the Common Core Learning Standards and the instruction incorporates strategies to reach the various levels of the ELLs. Students work in groups and assignments are projected based which tap into the four modalities (Reading, writing, speaking, listening). Jigsaw learning and the use of graphic organizers are specific teaching strategies employed during social studies. Science: PS 11 uses an inquiry based approach to teaching Science. Teachers use the FOSS kits to ensure that Common Core Learning Standards are infused in every lesson. Teachers are skilled in delivering hands-on lessons, where students have an opportunity to observe, hypothesize, record, and predict information. Students work in collaborative groups that will facilitate accountable talk. ELLs are supported by scaffolded lessons that allow them to demonstrate their learning through real-life applications such as planting, and taking care of animals. Teachers use hand-on activities and kinesthetic learning techniques to provide an optimal learning environment for English Language Learners. Also, the classrooms are equipped with charts, visual aids, tools and technology that create an interactive environment. The language of science instruction depends on the students' levels of English proficiency. Math: Our school Math curriculum is Engage New York which adheres to the New York State Common Core Standards. Bilingual classrooms currently have the Spanish editions of Engage New York. Instruction in bilingual classrooms is differentiated according to the English Proficiency levels in the classroom. Manipulatives and other realia are used to help students better understand the mathematical concepts by connecting them to real life situations. Content specific word walls are created to reinforce mathematical terms, along with symbolic representations. Students often work in collaborative groups or in pairs. Teachers scaffold instruction by presenting mathematical concepts in different ways such as modeling, partner work, mental math, visual, and math games. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are appropriately evaluated in their native language in several ways: LAB-R Spanish, formal running records using TC Assessment Pro in Spanish, teacher made assessments in Spanish and Engage New York assessments in Spanish. Student who 2018-19 CEP 62  are enrolled in testing grades the NYS Mathematics Exam and Science Exam are ordered in their native language if available. The school is also prepare to hire translators if needed for State testing. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. This academic year at PS 11 we don’t have any SIFE. If we receive any SIFE students we will provide the following: * A print rich environment * Strategies that include: word associations, cognates, KWL charts and anitcipation guides. * Engage student in hands-on learning * Cooperative groups * Strategies that weave together language and content instruction such as SIOP model b. For our newcomers at PS 11 we provide the following: * Classroom libraries which includes non-fiction, high interest, low level, multicultural literature * Supplemental native language instruction to assist with language development skills through small group instruction, when the native language is available * After school and Saturday Academy which provides additional support and opportunities to use the English language * Precise scaffolding strategies according to their language proficiency levels In addition to these services teachers are incorporating multicultural literature, to foster a deeper understanding of the newcomer home country. c. For the ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years we will provide the following: *Inquiry based analysis of NYSESLAT data *Individualized planning based on language needs *Materials and instructional technology designed to support the different modalities such as computer programs, listening centers *Academic Intervention Services *Professional development for teachers which focuses on ENL strategies, scaffolding, and language acquisition methodologies *Interim Assessments to assess growth and language development d. Many of the same services provided for ELLs receiving 4 to 6 years the long term ELLs will receive as well. e. The former ELLs will continue receiving ELL support of 90 minutes of Integrated ENL and testing modifications for up to two years after they pass the NYSESLAT. They will also be included in the After school Program. Teachers are also encouraged to continue teaching vocabulary explicitly and building academic language. Teachers utilize Common Core Learning Standards for language for a more structured approach in terms of second language development. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At PS 11 the teachers of ELL-SWDs use the following instructional strategies and grade-level materials: * SMART Boards/ ELMOs use of Technology * Small group instruction * Modify and adapt grade level text * Total Physical Response * Audio visual aids/ Listening Centers * Visual aids * Leveled libraries * High order skills emphasized in academic tasks * Provide multiple entry points Also, for our ELL-SWD, teachers provide project based assignment, hands on and kinesthetic learning to address the students' different learning styles. 2018-19 CEP 63  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At PS 11 we use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to support diverse ELL-SWD to achieve goals by doing the following: * Push in ELL services - Push in SETSS and ENL * Provide Professional Development for all teachers in ENL and Special Education * Collaborate with service providers, special education teachers, AIS * Common Planning Team Meeting for both General Education and Special Education Teachers to reinforce and re teach skills * Students are scheduled to attend classes in General Education for Enrichment as recommended by IEP We also have a school wide reading block time in which ELL-SWDs that need some added support and or need to be with students on their same reading levels can go to another classroom during that reading block. Also ELL-SWDs are integrated with other students during gym time and also during lunch time. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ENL self- contained and bilingual classrooms at our school use the Santillana Language program which incorporates reading comprehension and vocabulary development. We also use Raz-kids that helps to develop reading comprehension and vocabulary building. Both of these language program are offered in English. Our intervention services range from Push in, AIS, after school, and morning programs. The range are as follows: English Language Arts - Raz-kids and IReady as well as AIS and Rti Math - IReady and AIS Science - Enrichment Program during the school hours Social studies - Classroom Differentiation and Proect Based Assessments All of these services are designed to further develop their language acquisitions in a small group setting. PS 11 has developed an Rti team to also help implement intervention strategies for added support to our students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This school year we have added Dual Language (self-contained) in the Fourth Grade. The Estrellita Program is being used in the kindergarten though second grade dual language Spanish class. Trends found based on data in the dual language program was deficiencies in phonics skills in both languages (English and Spanish) so we adjusted the dual language schedule that includes a period of phonics instruction in both languages daily. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our school is fully committed to offering our ELL students equal access to all school programs and opportunities. All of our ELL students participate in every enrichment program that our school offers (e.g. music, arts, computer , etc). Additionally, classrooms that hold the ELLs have Smart Boards, listening centers, and bilingual libraries. One after school program is specifically designed for our ELL population. We offer Supplemental Programs After School for our ELLs. These programs aim to improve the ELA and Math skills and preparation for the state tests. We also use Studio in School. This program introduces students to a variety of visual arts media and techniques. Students are encouraged to discover the creative process and an artist's way of working. The students will be involved in various activities that include drawing, painting, collage, printmaking, and sculptures, to name a few. Here they are using listening and speaking skills. Other supplemental programs are Title I Literacy and Math Test Prep, Title III Stem Enrichment and 4th Grade Saturday Science Academy. 2018-19 CEP 64  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials that are used to support ELLs are SMART Board, internet, software (Science, Math, and Language games). Computer software such as Imagine Learning, Starfall, Raz-kids are used for instructional purposes. ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathway and Engage New York Math program (K-5). 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language support is delivered in TBE by having content word walls in the native language, having books in the native language in the classroom libraries as well as in the school library, and having small group instruction for the newcomers and beginners. In the ENL model we have peer tutoring with students that speak the same language. In TBE, we offer 1 period of native language support through the content. In ENL, we use English to offer 2 units of study for entering and emerging and 1 unit of study for transitioning and expanding using the ENL methodologies during instruction to provide a learning environment which ELLs can effectively acquire academic knowledge. In Dual Language we offer an entire day of Spanish in grades kindergarten to second grade which includes a period each day of Spanish as a Second Language (SSL). In third and fourth grade we offer 1 period of phonics and grammar in Spanish. Math and Social studies is taught in their home language- Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. PS 11 has the benefit of having Dual Language classrooms, from kindergarten through fourth grade. We have one Transitional Bilingual classroom in fifth grade. Children are placed in their appropriate grade level and with their peers. Our Integrated ENL support also goes into the classroom and works with the child's grade level teacher or AIS support pulls them out and works with the students that need that extra support. Therefore, children are receiving grade appropriate instruction. When ordering materials we look at the child's age, grade, and interests to ensure students will benefit from these materials. The curriculum being followed is Ready Gen. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? At PS 11 we have an Annex and all the resources are shared with them. The instructional materials that are used to support ELLs are SMART Board, internet, software (Science, Math, and Language games) which they also use. They also use Computer software such as Imagine Learning, Starfall, Raz-kids are used for instructional purposes as well as ReadyGen Biliteracy Pathway and Engage New York Math program (K-5). 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At PS 11 during the month of May/June the school hosts workshops for parents of newly enrolled kindergarten students. The Common Core Learning Standards are reviewed and are distributed. The Bilingual/ENL Coordinator, Ms. N. Castillo, Ms. Angela Reyes, ENL Teacher, parent coordinator, Ms. Sousa, present during this workshop. The Executive Team, and the ELL team works on a plan of activities for the new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year and their families. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language electives are offered at PS 11. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 CEP 65  a. The dual language model that is being used at PS 11 is the self-contained program . b. The core content area is taught in both languages. c. The language is separated by days: One day is taught in Spanish and the other day is in English in kindergarten through second grade. in third and fourth grade the languages are separated during the day. d. The emergent literacy is taught in both languages (simultaneous). Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school focuses on planning for differentiation and using data for instruction, grouping, and portfolios. Both Bilingual and ENL teachers involved in the ELL team, have monthly meetings scheduled for the purpose of planning, professional development, and vertical communication as cohorts of teachers of grades K-5. PD is based on teachers’ and school’s needs. Thus, teachers’ training has been designed around informing our Bilingual/ENL staff of pertinent ELL policy, as well as key instructional strategies, best practices, and materials available within the school. Teachers will be provided professional learning opportunities around all ATS reports and other data pertaining to ELL students. ENL and Bilingual teachers will be trained on how to manage and utilize different data sources. General classroom teachers, will be able to participate in professional development activities with the ENL and Bilingual teachers during their common planning time on a weekly basis. Support staff, such as paraprofessionals, aides and psychologists will also be afforded opportunities to participate in school-wide ENL training during the Staff Development days. Also, all related-educational service providers who support our Special Education ELLs, will have the opportunity for PD. ENL Coordinator will attend monthly network Professional Development and attend other Professional Development offered by The Division of English Language Learner Student Support (DELLSS) and Fordham University. PD Calendar 2018-2019: October - Chancellor's Regulation A-663 & Language Access Requirements & Resources - Parent Coordinator - Ms. Sousa and Ms. N. Castillo November - NYSESLAT Data Review & EDAT tool - Ms. Reyes and Ms. N. Castillo December - Discussing & Analyzing NYSESLAT Test Questions - Ms. Reyes and Ms. N. Castillo January - Planning for ENL Learners using Progressions - Ms. Reyes and Ms. N. Castillo February - ENL Strategies for ENL Learners - Ms. N. Castillo March - Teacher Fair Share - Ms. Reyes At PS 11 every effort is made by administration to provide the ENL, bilingual, monolingual, special education and support staff such as: paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, psychologist, occupational/physical therapist, speech, secretaries, parent coordinator with ongoing opportunities to attend both on-site and off-site workshops which reflect current theory based learning practices used for ENL /TBE instruction. The Bil/ENL Coordinator, Ms. N. Castillo and Ms. A. Reyes the ENL Provider attend several professional development sessions offered by the Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network, The Division of English Language Learner and Student Support (DELLSS) and the Bilingual Education Technical Assistance Centers (BETAC) to keep them abreast of the recent approaches, innovations in ENL instruction, new state standards, and hone their teaching skills. Strategies learned are passed on to the ENL /bilingual / monolingual / special ed classroom teachers who work with ELLs as needed during our curriculum planning time, Grade Level or Inquiry Team meetings. As a result of these workshops, teachers have adopted many of the learning models that support achievement for our ELL population. They are encouraged to work collaboratively in developing and refining their instructional skills. Grade conferences, Department meeting, keep staff members abreast of ongoing changes in the Common Core Learning Standards and Language Allocation Policy document. Workshops are provided by our Principal, Assistant Principal , team leaders, Bilingual/ENL Coordinator . Some topics that will be addressed are: Common Core Learning Standards, SIOP, Overview of the ENL/ TBE 2018-19 CEP 66  Program , LAP document, Use of assessments for the ELLs, Data Driven Instruction (NYSESLAT), ENL Strategies and Methodologies, Differentiated Instruction, Writer's Workshop, NYSESLAT and NYSITELL . In addition, during our ENL monthly meetings with Ms. Sousa, we offer workshops to our parents on topics such as: Testing Accommodations for ELLs, How to Help Your Child be Successful on State Tests, and Identifying Your Child As An ELL and Placing Into a Program of Choice. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At PS 11 we meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154 on Mondays when we have our Professional Learning for all teachers. (15%) We also meet vertically with TBE and ENL teachers (50%) other Mondays. The 50% of total hours for bilingual education/DL/ENL teachers will incorporate ELL strategies that teachers can use with their students. While the 15% of the 50% for all teachers will be addressed with the entire staff. Teachers will be sent via emails a schedule of upcoming professional development days to be conducted by the Office of English Language Learners, Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network, or Fordham University and be made available to all personnel. ENL teachers who attend any DELLSS of BFSC PD turnkey the information to the entire staff. Records are kept with agenda's and attendance of such development. All teachers attending workshops will keep ongoing log of hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PS 11 will provide annual individual meeting with the parents of ELLs during our Tuesdays afternoon parental period and/or when the ENL Provider has an extra prep period to schedule an individual meeting with parents. We have an open door policy in which parents are made available to contact any personnel for an update on their child's education. Translation is available through our multilingual staff member , if needed (Spanish and French). For the other languages we have the Language Line which can assist us with translation and interpretation. Teacher's keep an ongoing log to document individual meetings with parents/ guardians. This additional meeting will be utilized to discuss goals, language development and assessment results. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The school has created venues to engage the parents in order to give them a more active and participatory role in the academic development of our children. This involvement begins as early as registration when parents participate in an interview process in which the child’s and family’s background is discussed. Parents will be active participants in the decision making process for their child's academic program choice. Parents will also participate in the formal periodic review of children’s progress, which will take place twice a year. In order to better prepare parents for these discussions and become better informed in school affairs, the school will conduct instructional workshops for them, where they will review the same data sources available to teachers, and undergo a similar data comprehension analysis process which is aimed at improving student achievement. The activities that we will provide are PD's that will encourage parents to read daily to their child. We will conduct this in the computer lab and show them how to navigate the web and access MYON books. Expose them to the different resources/websites like: Starfall, Colorin Colorado, Cool Math, etc. We will take a trip to the neighborhood library and expose them to the different resources and be able to apply for a library card. We will encourage parents to join the PA/PTA,s. Encourage weekly meetings/conversations through Parent Engagement availability on Tuesdays the entire school year. Parents are also supported through academic workshops where both content and best teaching practices will be shared. 2018-19 CEP 67  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joan Kong, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 11X, The Highbridge School School DBN: 09X011 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Joan Kong Title Principal Ms. Henrietta Sirleaf Assistant Principal Ms. Nelida Sousa Parent Coordinator Ms. Angela Reyes ENL/Bilingual Teacher Nereida Figueroa Parent Ms. Mayra Mendez Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Irma Beltre-Vasquez Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Elvira Gonzalez Ms. Marianne Minnich Coach Coach Ms. Del Rosario School Counselor Ms. Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/26/18 0926/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 09/26/18 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X011 School Name: The Highbridge School Superintendent: Leticia Rosario The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary)Ms. Nelida Sousa Parent Coordinator conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data that is used to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs is the Home Language Survey that parents complete upon admission of their child to the school as well as the ethnic and race identification. Both the Student Identification Emergency Card and the last two questions of the Home Language Identification Survey asks the parent their preferred language before signing the form. PS 11's largest population is Hispanic. Therefore, all communication that is sent out to parents is translated into Spanish to assure that the parents understand the correspondence. At PS 11, we have the Parent Coordinator who is bilingual in Spanish and is available to assist parents. The Parent Coordinator and the Bilingual/ENL Coordinator translate in PA meetings, workshops and Parent Teacher Conferences as needed for parents who speak Spanish. As for the other few languages, the parents have indicated that they would like the correspondence to be sent in English. We also 2018-19 CEP 71  access language preferences of our parent community from the Home Language Identification Surveys that they fill out at the beginning of the school year as well as the ATS reports that lists their languages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Fulani Mandinke Malinke French Araucan 372 291 3 2 1 1 1 55.44 43.37 0.45 0.3 0.15 0.15 0.15 369 294 3 3 1 0 1 54.99 43.82 0.45 0.45 0.15 0 0.15 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Monthly calendar End of Previous Month School Announcements Monthly Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Spanish translation provided by the Parent Coordinator in house. For the other languages we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit during the summer when we create our monthly calendar. Spanish translation provided by the Parent Coordinator. For the other languages we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2018-19 CEP 72  Parent Teacher Conference Notices November March After School Letters October/November Photo Release Forms September Spanish translation provided by the Parent Coordinator. For the other languages we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Spanish translation provided by the Parent Coordinator. For the other languages we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Spanish translation provided by the Parent Coordinator. For the other languages we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March and May Parent Orientation September, March Parent Involvement Tuesdays, monthly interpretation service(s)? Teachers, Other Staff and Parent Coordinator are available for interpretation. We also use the Language Line for the other languages. ENL Teachers and Parent Coordinator are available for interpretation. We also use the Language Line for the other languages. Classroom Teachers and Parent Coordinator are available for interpretation. We also use the Language Line for the other languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school's communication strategy to reach limited-English proficient families in the event of a school emergency is to use Messenger and leave messages in English and Spanish since those are the most preferred languages in our 2018-19 CEP 73  school as well as use the blue emergency card and call. The languages that these communications will occur in are English and Spanish. For the other languages, our teachers have the Language Line number placed inside their Fire Drill Evacuation Folder in case they need to communicate a school emergency. Our teachers are aware of their parents different languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At PS 11 we will schedule Professional Development on a Monday to ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The PD's will be on Translation and Interpretation Services and Language Access Requirements and Resources. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At PS 11 we have translated signs at the main entrance and main office letting parents know that there is a Language Line that we have access to when we or they need translation for another language other than English. We also let parents know at PTA meetings, parent meetings, etc. that we have access to a Language Line that can assist us in translation and interpretation., At PS 11, all information regarding Section VII of Chancellor/Regulation A-663 are displayed in the main entrance of our school as well as the main office of PS 11. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At PS 11, the mechanisms we use to gather information from parents is from our school generated surveys as well as the NYC School Survey report. 2018-19 CEP 74 
