2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X015 School Name: P.S. X015 INSTITUTE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LEARNING Principal: TARA EDMONDS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: The Institute of Environmental Learning @ PS/MS 15 3210000010015 BEDS Code: Grades Served: K - 8 School Number (DBN): 10x015 School Address: 2195 Andrews Avenue Bronx, NY 10453 Phone Number: 718-563-0473 Fax: 718-563-1568 School Contact Person: Tara R. Edmonds Email Address: tedmonds@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Tara R. Edmonds ShawandaWeems Juan Nunez Vacancy Elena Maldonado Yvonne Williams District Information Geographical District: 10 Superintendent: MaribelHulla Superintendent’s Office Address: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10457 Superintendent’s Email Address: MHulla@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-741-5852 Fax: 718-741-7098 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Bronx Executive Director: Jose Ruiz Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Email Address: Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-741-8895 Fax: 718-828-7776 2018-19 CEP 3  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tara R. Edmonds ShawandaWeems Juan Nunez Judith Velazquez Garcia Elena Maldonado *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Miguelina Martinez TamikaMorales Minerva Maldonado Audrey Wigfall Vacancy Doreen Luckey Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/UFT Chairperson/UFT Member/ 2018-19 CEP 4  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 5  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 6  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 7  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of PS/MS 15 is to build a “Community of Learners and Leaders”. The community of learners and leaders at PS/MS 15 encourages the involvement of all stakeholders so that they are active participants in a collaborative decision making process. We encourage active participation and exploration by placing special value on personal growth and development. It is our intent to educate young people who will strive for excellence and to be college and career ready. Our expectations are for every child to reach their highest potential through our home-school partnership. We are firmly committed to meet the challenges to create and support a child centered school where all children can and will 2018-19 CEP 8  learn. Our school community provides a safe and nurturing environment in which we can incorporate a curriculum that will address the needs of our diverse student population. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Institute of Environmental Learning at PS/MS 15 is housed in a building known as the Educational Complex at 15. We share space with two other schools: PS 291, a District 10 neighborhood zoned school servicing students in grades K-5, and P10, a District 75 Citywide Special Education off site program for approximately 100 students. We share communal areas like the gym, auditorium, library and cafeterias. PS/MS 15 is a K-8 school organized as a Kindergarten through Fifth Grade Elementary School and Sixth through Eighth Grade, Middle School. There are two classes per grade in kindergarten through eighth grade. We also have one self-contained multigrade class in the Middle School. The average class size is 28-32 students per class. PS/MS 15 has a partnership with the P 10 (District 75) inclusion program. Students from P10 are active participants in our Middle School Program. The P10 program comes with a full-time SETSS teacher and 3-4 Paraprofessionals depending on the number of students that are mainstreaming. PS/MS 15 is a school focused on the development of the “whole child.” As a result, we have been committed to providing intensive counseling and at-risk services to our students . Additionally, we departmentalize across grades 4-8 in order to expose our students to teaching experts in each subject area. Further to this, we believe in small group instruction to meet the individualized needs of our students. Our community is also focused on cultivating and developing the potential demonstrated by our students, teachers and administrators by continuously seeking leadership opportunities that will promote their growth. These opportunities include but not limited to the following: Athletic Teams across the grades 5-8, specifically, our student basketball team, our Jaguars Track Team which is comprised of students from 4-8 grades coached by our teachers. Our Mighty Milers K-4 program; Rising New York Road Runners program. The Thurgood Marshshall Junior Mock Trial Competition, The NYC Urban Debate League and the Good Sheperd COMPASS and SONYC programs. On the 2018 NYC School Survey, PS/MS 15 scored a 3.63%, with 100% positive responses in the area of literacy, 100% in math, 83% in course clarity, 65% in quality of student discussion, and 70% of academic press. Some of these figures were above or just below the citywide average. During the school’s 2017-2018 Quality Review PS/MS 15 demonstrated Proficiency in the area. The school was evaluated as Well developed and teacher pedagogy (1.2). In the area of curriculum, the Reviewer found that instructional shifts have not yet been purposefully integrated into the curricula. In the area of pedagogy, the Reviewer found that there were uneven levels of student-to-student discussions across classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2017-18 Data was gathered from the School Quality Guide, Items Skills Analysis Tool, and School Based Assessments. PS/MS 15’s strength is in student progress and school environment as evidenced by the exceeding target identification on the School Quality Guide while student achievement and closing the achievement gap are identified in the same document as meeting target. Therefore, there is a need to set high standards in every classroom; providing curricula and strategies that engage all students in critical thinking skills in order to effect growth in student progress. During the 2016-2017 Quality Review, the rating showed that our instructional core ensures rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and is aligned to Common Core Learning standards and/or content standards was developing. We will continue to look at this practice and continue to focus on the learning shifts. Additionally, we were rated developing on developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is 2018-19 CEP 9  informed by instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaning work products. According to the Frameworks for Great Schools Report for 2015, the Quality of Student Discourse was below the Citywide average. ● Recognizing that academic excellence is a moving target, improving student performance in order to meet rising NYS effective Annual Measurable Objectives, as well as the 2015-2016 Frameworks for Great Schools a school wide priority On the 2018 NYC School Survey, PS/MS 15 scored a 3.63%, with 100% positive responses in the area of literacy, 100% in math, 83% in course clarity, 65% in quality of student discussion, and 70% of academic press. Some of these figures were above or just below the citywide average. During the school’s 2017-2018 Quality Review PS/MS 15 demonstrated Proficiency in the area. The school was evaluated as Well developed and teacher pedagogy (1.2). In the area of curriculum, the Reviewer found that instructional shifts have not yet been purposefully integrated into the curricula. In the area of pedagogy, the Reviewer found that there were uneven levels of student-to-student discussions across classrooms. Data was gathered from the School Quality Guide, Items Skills Analysis Tool, and School Based Assessments. PS/MS 15’s strength is in student progress and school environment as evidenced by the exceeding target identification on the School Quality Guide while student achievement and closing the achievement gap are identified in the same document as meeting target. Therefore, there is a need to set high standards in every classroom; providing curricula and strategies that engage all students in critical thinking skills in order to effect growth in student progress. During the 2017-2018 Quality Review, the rating showed that our instructional core ensures rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and is aligned to Common Core Learning standards and/or content standards was developing. We will continue to look at this practice and continue to focus on the learning shifts. Additionally, we were rated developing on developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaning work products. According to the Frameworks for Great Schools Report for 2016, the Quality of Student Discourse was below the Citywide average. Recognizing that academic excellence is a moving target, improving student performance in order to meet rising NYS effective Annual Measurable Objectives, as well as the 2015-2016 Frameworks for Great Schools a school wide priority We continue to work on developing a rigorous curriculum that includes differentiation, formative assessments, higher order thinking, critical thinking questions, and best practices in order to meet the needs of all our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our SWDs comprise 19.9% of our population and our ENLs comprise 7.0% of our population. Our students are serviced in the 2018-19 CEP 10  are most appropriate settings. Students grouped heterogeneously and are taught by a licensed pedagogue. are Students and assessed the based on data received from numerous sources, instruction is tailored to meet their needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school made the most progress during the 2016- 2018, is in Rigorous Instruction. Since 2016, we have had a gradual increase from 3.12% to 3.63%. The second element in the Framework for Great Schools in which our school made the most progress is in Strong Family Ties, which increased from 3.23 to 3.71%. The key areas of focus for this school year include Supportive Environment, which was not scored and Effective Leadership that was 3.42% in 2016, deceased to 3.39 in 2017 and then increased to 3.50 in 2018. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X015 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 480 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 24 25 21 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 34 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 77.9% % Reduced Lunch 9.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 86.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.67 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 46.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 81% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 8 8 94.5% 0.4% 20.0% 11.5% 1.0% 1.0% 2 10% 10.8 55.3% 70% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data was gathered from the School Quality Guide, Items Skills Analysis Tool, and School Based Assessments. PS/MS 15’s strength is in student progress and school environment as evidenced by the exceeding target identification on the School Quality Guide while student achievement and closing the achievement gap are identified in the same document as meeting target. Therefore, there is a need to set high standards in every classroom; providing curricula and strategies that engage all students in critical thinking skills in order to effect growth in student progress. On the 2018 NYC School Survey, PS/MS 15 scored a 3.39, with 91% positive responses in the area of literacy, 92% in math, 86% in course clarity, 70% in quality of student discussion, and 74% of academic press. All of these figures were at or above the citywide average except for the quality of student discussion, which was 3 percentage points below the citywide average. During the school’s 2017 Quality Review (January 19-20, 2017), PS/MS 161 demonstrated Proficiency in the area of assessment (2.2). The school was evaluated as Developing in the areas of curriculum (1.1) and teacher pedagogy (1.2). In the area of curriculum, the Reviewer found that instructional shifts have not yet been purposefully integrated into the curricula. In the area of pedagogy, the Reviewer found that there were uneven levels of student-to-student discussions across classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of all teachers of all content areas planning and implementing data-driven instruction, 3% more students in grades 3-8 will achieve proficiency levels of 3 or 4 on the spring 2019 New York State ELA and Math exams, as compared to the percentage of students in grades 3-8 who achieved proficiency levels of 3 or 4 on the spring 2018 New York State ELA and Math exams. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Kindergarten through Second Grade Classes are using several different programs in order to address the Five Pillars of Reading. Core Knowledge Listen and Learn Portion of the program in order to builds fluency. The program also builds students content background knowledge in both social studies and science. The students will also use Wilson’s FUNdation Program for Phonemic Awareness. Lastly, they will teach skills and comprehension through Guided Reading, Additionally, through the use of small group instruction, the teachers will address RTI, Differentiation, skills . THe SWD and ENL's will be addressed. The 3rd -8th grades classes are using Expeditionary Learning literacy program, which is a content rich program whose primary focus is Science and Social Studies. Based on the curriculum, the teachers have created units of study that promote higher order questions in order to promote student thinking to higher levels and engagement in deep group discussions about their work that will extend their thinking and participation in an exchange of viewpoint and ideas. As we work with the students and the curriculum towards meeting higher standards we will: adjust lessons, units and classroom assessments in order to meet the needs of all of our students. During our professional development cycles teachers look at student work, the types of higher level questions needed in order to produce higher levels of student discussions. The use of text dependent questions and the level of text dependent questions and the use of Accountable Talk. We are also continuously adjusting our curriculum in order to meet the needs of the students based on the data from baselines, benchmarks, assessments. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Kindergarten September Administration, – Second 2018– grade June 2019 Teachers, Universal Literacy Coach, Instructional Coach Third-Eighth Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administration, grades Teachers, Instructional Coach All Teachers Sept. 2018 - Administration, June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Coach The students and teachers will utilize technology driven assessments in ELA (e.g., iReady,) in order diagnose and assess the students All Staff persons Sept. 2017- June 2018 All members of the PS/MS 15 School to . Community 2018-19 CEP 14  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core Learning Standard shifts in order to support their children at home through workshops and meetings from teachers quarterly: September, November, March and May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. K-8 ELA Teachers, 3-8 Extended Day and ENL Academy, Universal Literacy Coach, Instructional Coach, Lead Teachers and Administration, EL Units of Study, Ready Test Prep Books, iReady Computer program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will submit mid-unit and end of unit data for December 2018 and February 2019. Teachers will work in collaboration with the coaches and administrators to monitor progress of level 1 and Level 2 students in order to reflect upon and refine practice. Is there a decrease? What are the next steps? Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers will submit mid-unit and end of unit data for December 2018 and January 2019. Teachers will work in collaboration with coaches to monitor progress of level 1 and Level 2 students in order to reflect upon and refine practice. Is there a decrease? What are the next steps? Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS/MS 15 received a well-developed on the 2017-2018 School Quality Review regarding the social emotional well being of a child. Middle School students in grades 7/8 did not have a PBIS system in place. Teachers and students expressed a need for a system similar to the “PAWS” system utilized in grades K-5 and the Section Sheets Reward system was created. Classes earned points each period for excellent behavior and earned class rewards when reaching 500 total points. An intramural co-ed sports program during the middle school lunch period was started to encourage positive behaviors and sense of community. Students participate and compete on teams in basketball, track, debate, mock trial, music and dance, flag football. Students must maintain excellent behavior and attendance to participate. The goal was to offer students positive behavior reinforcements which would lead to fewer removals and suspensions. Also, Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) data reflects yearly suspension totals for the 2013 – 2017 school years consistently averaging 16-17 per year. A plan to ensure that a consistent PBIS system(s) will be implemented and the results reviewed to determine their effectiveness. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the PS/ MS 15 staff will continue to provide a safe and supportive environment for their students in order to foster an engaging learning experience within the PS /MS 15 community as evidenced by a 5 percentage point reduction in the number of Online Occurrence Reports compared to the 2017-2018 school year. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Bi-Monthly pupil personnel teams will review individual students that are at-risk academically or social emotionally. This may result in the development and implementation of behavior support plans, SWIS forms, functional behavioral assessments, or other at risk interventions. Identified students not displaying expected behaviors. Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Classroom teachers, School Based Support Team, Child Study Team, Administrators, Parents. Staff will engage in PBIS overview/orientation to begin implementation of school wide set expectations of appropriate student behavior. All students in K-8 grades. Sept. 2018- All Staff Members. June 2019 School will collaborate with outreach counselor from "Thrive NYC" in our to provide services and outreach of families. All students in grades K-8. Sept. 2018- June 2019. All Staff Members. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environments in order to support their children at home through workshops and meetings by teachers and other outside resources quarterly: September, November, March and May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common planning time , THRIVE NYC Consultant, professional development and professional learning opportunities , The development of teacher leaders (building capacity), Administration, Coaches, Professional Development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, a 5 percentage point reduction of SWIS forms and Online Occurrence reports will be seen compared to February of 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measures will be by January 2018, there will be a decrease in the number of OORS reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2017-18 Quality Review indicated a Proficient rating Across classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect a belief system that students learn best through engagement. Across classrooms, student work products reflect high levels of student thinking and participation. Impact Although students are participating in discussions, and are engaged, and their work products reflect high levels of thinking, there is no evidence of student ownership of their learning on Quality indicator 1.2 – Pedagogy. The findings of the reviewer indicted that across classrooms, teaching strategies inconsistently provided entry points into the lesson and that student discussions reflected uneven levels of student understanding. The impact diminished the opportunities to promote higher order thinking and engagement. The Quality Review also revealed that PS/MS 15 was rated as Proficient on Quality indicator 4.2 – Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. The findings for this indicator revealed that teacher teams analyze assessment data and student work, and make adjustments to the curricula. The findings also indicted that distributive leadership structures are embedded in school practice. By looking at these two indicators it is apparent that we need to address the inconsistent practice in Quality Indicator 1.2. We will utilize the teacher teams to refocus our efforts to address entry points and differentiation within the classroom. Teachers that have been identified as successful based on classroom observations will be team leaders. They will share best practices and demo lessons (classroom inter-visitations) related to Danielson’s components. By reviewing our ADVANCE dashboard, the observations of teachers practice is indicating that our teachers are secure in Domain 2 but are inconsistent in the ratings for Domain 3. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will engage weekly in professional development to improve instructional techniques including strategies to provide students multiple entry points and greater opportunities to engage the students in higher order thinking skills. This will be evidenced by a 3% point increase in the number of teachers performing at highly effective in component 3c". 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PS/MS 15 will form a Professional Learning Team (PLT) before the start of the school year with representatives from administration and the teaching staff and a UFT representative or designee. The Professional Learning Team will meet bimonthly in order to develop and review plans for professional development cycles that align to our CEP goals, the citywide instructional expectations and current trends in our data. Teachers and Administrators Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Admin Sept. 2018- June 2019 PLT, Admin., Teachers and Coaches PLT, Admin., Teachers and Coaches A formal observation schedule will be developed and implemented so that administrators have a time-frame to observe and provide feedback to teachers. Principal and Assistant Principal Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teaching and strategies in order to support their children at home through workshops and meetings from teachers and consultants quarterly: September, November, March and May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be allocated to allow for per diem support in order to provide teachers with the opportunity to attend professional development opportunities, inter/intra -visitations, and turnkey collaborative meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 2 % of our teachers will be scoring Highly Effective in Domain 3. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Advance website tools and the Danielson Rubric will be the instrument of measure used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school leadership at PS/MS 15 continuously supports the professional growth of teachers and staff. We offer high quality weekly professional development cycles; have an instructional coach, Universal Literacy Coach and administrators to support our teachers. The principal meets three times a year with each individual staff member. At these meetings the following items are discussed; student progress/achievement, teacher professional goals, curriculum based decisions, resources needed to enhance student learning, professional development opportunities. At these meetings, the teachers have an open dialogue with school leaders where they can make suggestions/modifications that will help increase student achievement. The staff is also included in many decision-making areas, such as SLT, the hiring committee, curriculum decision-making, instructional core, systems for improvement and school culture. According to our January 2018, School Quality review review, our school received a proficient rating in quality review statement 3.4 Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. The level of trust in school leadership is reflected in the fact that all eligible teachers selected the option to have informal observations rather than the formal observation option. This shows that (1) the teachers feel comfortable enough with the level of their everyday pedagogy that they don’t need to schedule observations formally, and (2) there is a great deal of confidence in the effectiveness of the administrative staff that observes them. This school year our need is to build upon distributed leadership. We have decided to have staff lead professional development sessions. Teachers self-reflect on their pedagogy, select an area of expertise, use feedback from Danielson and administrators to create a professional development session to share with staff. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will collaborate with the Professional Learning Committee, Administrators Coaches, and Grade Leaders to organize, revise, and facilitate a full year of rich, effective professional learning opportunities aligned to our students’ particular needs. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? In September 2018, school leaders will establish a year-long assessment calendar that includes administration dates, scoring dates and times, deadlines for organizing and submitting assessment results, and subsequent data analysis meeting dates. Kindergarten-Eighth Sept. 2018 Administration When debriefing with teachers after observations, school leaders will root conversations in: the Common Core Standards, the rigor of tasks, evidence in student work from the lesson, high-level questioning, and the teacher’s lesson and unit planning that questioning, and the teacher’s lesson and unit planning that preceded the lesson. The principal will regularly consult with the Professional Learning Committee to assess the impact of professional learning opportunities and to revise the plan when necessary. Benchmark assessment results will also indicate the impact of the teacher’s Professional Learning The principal will provide multiple opportunities for teacher leaders to facilitate professional learning with colleagues. Increased teacher leadership will build trust among the staff and it will help us to sustain the impact of professional learning from one year to the next 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers October Administration 2018-May 2019 Professional Learning Committee Sept 2018- May 2019 Administration, Professional Learning Committee All Teachers November 2018- May 2019 Administration Professional Learning Committee How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies in order to support their children at home through workshops and meetings from teachers and consultants quarterly: September, November, March and May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 23  Title I funding Title III after-school program Resources for test preparation Outside support for small-group instruction Per session for after-school test preparation program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By April 2019 , 30% of school staff would have led a professional development session. If the teacher has not yet implemented the PD session, the principal will review and discuss the teacher’s objectives for the PD session. In order to meet our expected goal, progress monitoring will be done in three intervals: November, March and May. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be that will be used to assess the progress of the professional development session will be the feedback survey created for the professional development cycle. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the attendance, prior parental participation, a school wide parent survey, the learning survey, feedback from parents that regularly attend meetings and the Capacity Framework for Strong Family- Community Ties, we determined that we need to extend the range of opportunities to encourage greater parent participation in order for more members of the school community to actively participate in school wide activities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see a 5% increase in the number of parents attending Parent Teacher Association meetings and all school based workshops through the use of agendas, sign-in sheets and feedback surveys. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent Teacher Association meetings will be advertised in a All Sept Administration, timely manner and publicized through various ways: Calling Parents/Guardians 2018- June Parent posts, fliers, calendars. The topics will differ on a monthly 2019 basis in order to draw in parents with different concerns. Coordinator, Coaches Teachers, CBO's Collaboration with our Community Based Organization in order to provide additional social, emotional and recreation support for students which would extend the learning beyond the classroom. All Sept Administration, Parents/Guardians 2018- June Parent Parents are active participants on the School Leadership Team. All 2019 Coordinator, Dean of Students, Teachers, CBO's Sept Administration, Our SLT has at least 10 members, with 5 of the members from 2019 Coordinator, Parents/Guardians 2018- June Parent the parent body of our school. Parents on the SLT will Teachers participate in many of the decisions that affect their children The Parent Coordinator/ Instructional Coach will facilitate All Sept. Administration, monthly workshops. The Parent Coordinator and Instructional Parents/Guardians 2018- June Parent Coach will organize workshop for parents that are geared toward making parents aware of what is expected at school, the curriculum and initiatives in place at our school, the 2019 Coordinator, Teachers 2018-19 CEP 26  importance of standardized tests and other social emotional topics. The workshops will also focus on providing our students’ parents with practical strategies that they can employ at home with their children to help them become more successful students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support our school are Good Shepherd, THRIVE NYC, DIAL-A-TEACHER, NEw York Life, St. Barnabus Dental Clinic, CONCEPT and NYC Public Library. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Non-contractual services/parent involvement funding for support of the goal is provided from Title 1 SWP the 1% parent allocation. Per session has been identified for professional development, to support family workshops, and activities for parents and students. Per session OTPS will support supplies and materials for parent workshops, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly Sign in Sheets, Attendance at PTA Meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences, Parent Workshops, School Learning Survey Needs Assessments will determine if progress has been made every three months, December, March and June. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure with be the increase in parent participation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) TCRWP Assessments, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Close Reading, Students receive During School Day, small group, one to- one and whole After School. class as needed. Running Records, Text dependent Student Work, End of questions, test Unit Assessments, sophistication, Exit Tickets, NYS Academic Assessments, Periodic vocabulary Mathematics Assessments Performance Tasks, Student Work, End of Everyday Math end of unit exams , IMPACT, and Small group During School Day, instruction is After School. Unit Assessments, Exit Tickets, NYS Teachers will use the Ready and “Coach” books provided by teachers during the day school Assessments, Periodic Assessments as an instructional and during extended intervention and day, guide, math journals, Tutoring sessions. skill drills, math vocabulary building and authentic application of skills in Preparing our 2018-19 CEP 28  Science Student Work, End of Unit Assessments, Exit Tickets, NYS Assessments, Performance Assessments Social Studies Student Work, End of Unit Assessments, Exit Tickets, NYS Assessments, Performance Assessments students for academic success Specialist evaluates assessments so that areas of student and whole class weakness can be Identified to inform instruction. Students have opportunities to be engrossed in the scientific method as a way to ask and answer scientific questions through observations, experimentation, background research, constructing a hypothesis, testing their hypothesis via experimentation, analyzing their data and drawing a conclusion A Social Studies Cluster teacher provides added Students are taught During School Day, in whole groups; After School. small groups push in and pull out in a group of up to 10 students utilizing project-based instruction. Support is given in During School Day, whole and small After School. groups support using Passport, historical fiction,DBQ’s, Newspapers Students may request Support sessions with 2018-19 CEP 29  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher recommendation Parent recommendation staff at different times such as lunch. During ELA Non-Fiction unit students are instructed in how to address content Based information. There are cross curricular connections made between ELA and the content areas throughout the School year. Strategies used: Counseling (6-8 During School Day, Conducts Functional Behavior Assessments weeks) for the student As needed. who does not have anIEP but is at risk of a special education referral. Intervention plans with guidance prior to referrals for behavioral concerns. Formal & informal Classroom observations using methods including interval time Counseling (6-8 weeks) for the student who does not have an 2018-19 CEP 30  IEP assessment ( intervention plans ( consultation with the family who was referred to a community agency 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) PS/MS 15 presently has 67 students presently in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing with receive family welcome packages the include school uniforms, backpacks, school supplies, etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS/MS 15 works closely with Teaching Fellows and local colleges ie. Manhattanville, PACE, Mahattan College, Lehman College, etc. in order to obtain highly qualified teachers. Through the Teaching Fellows Program, teachers receive Professional Development, on site practical application experience within inner city schools, and they must be enrolled in a Master’s Program. PS/MS 15 uses the Open Market Transfer System to recruit and hire highly qualified teachers. PS/MS 15 uses 5% Title 1 funding to provide the education, professional development and training to ensure that teachers are highly qualified. Mentors are assigned to support new teachers, as well as time is set during the school day for them to conference. Supervisors follow up to ensure mentors are meeting consistently with the mentees. Attendance by administration and faculty at all city-wide and borough job fairs. Coaches and Administration will provide ongoing professional development to ensure effective use of teaching strategies, (best practice), rubrics, curriculum maps, and lesson planning. Best practices are shared at the Professional Team Meetings held every week by department and once a month by grade. Topics include but are not limited to: teacher practice, looking at student work, interpreting data, higher level questioning, differentiation. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In our efforts to provide high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core Learning Standards and to grow, we are highly invested in professional development opportunities. We offer professional development to all staff on current topics provided by 2018-19 CEP 34  administrators, the instructional coach, support staff, outside vendors, the UFT and the DOE. All professional development is research based and evidence based. We plan professional development using research based strategies and a research based teaching framework. We believe in individualized professional development plans that are designated to focus on each teacher’s needs. Teachers are active participants in the process and collaborate with administration to look at their development mainly through the observation process which utilizes Danielson’s Framework for Teaching as well as understanding student data and looking at student work. Teachers self-assess on a regular basis and confer with school leaders. Research based strategies (RBI’s) are emphasized in our trainings and via the mini and formal observation process. Inter-visitations are encouraged for all teachers as well as participation in external professional development opportunities. Our teacher are retained by providing on-site trainings, modeling, and teacher team development. First year teachers are assigned Mentors. We are committed to ensuring that our teachers have the resources and support needed to succeed. We encourage celebrations of success and sharing of good practices across grades and content areas. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). PS/MS 15 provides a variety of opportunities for pre-school students to transition into the elementary school. It is our goal to prepare all students for success in school and to lay the foundation for college and career readiness. This will be is accomplished through: Parent involvement activities, screening for Kindergarten readiness, providing early intervention services as needed, curriculum planning and delivery of instruction and 2018-19 CEP 35  coordination of social and emotional supports. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The decision making process that is used to include teachers regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development regarding the use of assessment results to improve is a collaborative effort which includes Administration and teachers. The MOSL committee consists of teachers from various constituencies that represent the body. Together with the Administration we decide through consensus what types of assessments are needed based on the needs of the students and the time of the year. Professional development is differentiated based on the teacher and student individual teacher needs 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 435,922.00 135,782.00 11,200.00 0 2,658,081.00 X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 2018-19 CEP 36  advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 CEP 37   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/MS 15 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. PS/MS 15 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the No Child Left Behind Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS 15 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum PS/MS 15 will provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); PS/MS 15 will support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 41  PS/MS 15 will provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; PS/MS 15 will provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 42  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: There is an increase in our ENL population entering Kindergarten this year, plus our existing ENL population (long term ELL’s). In order to achieve proficiency in English we are going to incorporate scaffolded advanced literacy instruction into our teaching practice. Incorporating the four hallmarks of advanced literacy skills will lead to growth of ELL’s in the new language, and a higher outcome of success in English language proficiency. The hallmarks include: engaging texts - big ideas, rich content; talk/discuss to build conversation; write to build language and knowledge; and high utility vocabulary word which add depth of knowledge in comprehension. This will challenge students with the English language/writing skills needed to support proficiency and growth in the new language. To enable the language development of our ENL learners we will have an afterschool program for grades 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 and 8th during the 2018-2019 school year. The program will target students that are in the emerging, transitional and expanding stages of language development. According to the 2018 NYSESLAT scores, these students need support in reading comprehension, listening and writing. The program will service 11 students in first grade, ten students in the second grade, 11 students in the third grade, 3 students in the fourth grade, 4 students in the 5th grade, two students in the six grade, seven students in the seventh grade and six students in the eight grade. The afterschool program will be taught by 3 certified ENL teachers. This will allow the ELL’s students to receive additional instruction in reading comprehension, listening and writing skills. The teachers will target specific skills based on the classroom data as well as Baseline data and NYSESLAT results. The following skills will be targeted, building prior knowledge, building academic vocabulary, writing literary responses, citing text base answers, citing contextual evidence, re-reading, discussing the main idea, gist, central idea, focusing on mechanics, grammar and spelling in the context of student’s work. The students will also be provided with support on planning, discussing and organizing their ideas to write sentences, paragraphs and essays. The afterschool will take place Wednesday and Thursday from 2:30 to 4pm starting November 7, 2018 through April 17, 2019. Three certified teachers will teach in the program and will be paid according to the contract agreement for the days stated above. The students will receive 120 minutes of instructional time in Advanced Literacy Instruction The ENL teachers using exemplary ENL methodologies and Advance Literacy instruction will expose the children to oral expression, listening, reading comprehension, writing skills and word study. The ENL teachers will target instruction in the linguistic and academic needs of the students. Ensuring that instruction is aligned to the CCLS, Advance Literacy Hallmarks and age and grade appropriate. The instructional materials that will be use will include Attanasio and Associates, “Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and beyond”, Phonics and Friends classroom set – to build decoding and letter sound skills for the lower elementary, Write Time - Student Handbook, and New York Coach, Supporting the Standards. The students will also use materials that will help them with questioning, comprehension, use of graphic organizers and building academic vocabulary. These materials will be used to help support instruction in the new language. The three ENL teachers will meet with the ELA content teachers to discuss data and the individual needs of the ENL students. The teachers will meet Tuesdays from 3:00 to 3:30. The ENL supervisor will also train and plan with the ENL teachers. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In the effort to achieve advanced literacy instruction in diverse schools, our teachers will receive professional development that will achieve the following outcomes: 1.to create an understanding of the characteristics of effective literacy instruction for ELLs that is research based; 2. to develop expertise of high quality curriculum and instructional plans to support ELL’s; 3. to continue the implementation of the advanced literacies strategies learned in their daily pedagogical practice. The teachers will meet Tuesdays from 3:00 to 3:30 once a month. In the workshop, the Principal (Mrs. Edmonds) and Assistant Principal (Ms. Medina) and ENL teachers will discuss instructional strategies and methodologies of advanced literacy instruction and the four hallmarks of advanced literacy. The teachers will also discuss best practices for teaching ENL students and scaffolds to be implemented such as graphic organizers, pair work, writer’s workshop, phonics, text dependent questions, vocabulary, looking at student work according to CCLS standards and using data to drive instruction. The teachers will be in a study group working with the book, “Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills - A Guide for Leaders in Linguistically Diverse Schools.” The expectation is that the study group will increase the quality of instruction for ENL students and thus the enhancement of the afterschool curriculum. Once the teachers complete their study group they will turnkey ENL methodologies for the ELA classroom teachers. The teachers will meet Tuesdays from 3:00 to 3:30. The ENL supervisor will also train and plan with the ENL teachers. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental involvement is implemented in various ways. We arrange activities throughout the school year which promotes active parental engagement. In addition to all the activities we have throughout the year for our parents, we also have workshops that are specifically geared towards the parents of our ENL students. We provide an overview of and information about services for the ENL entitled students, parenting skills and tools for providing an academically rich environment at home. ENL’s are provided training to support early literacy, workshops that describe methods that can be utilized to support second language acquisition and workshops to 2018-19 CEP 46  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities help navigate the high school selection process to ensure that our parents have the tools necessary to make informed decisions. The workshop will be conducted on September 30,2018. Feedback forms are distributed at the close of each workshop, which encourage parents to provide immediate feedback to the presenters as well as to identify follow-up topics of interest. In addition, the needs of parents are assessed on a continuous basis. Parents consult with the Bilingual Parent Coordinator to access areas of interest and or concerns. Upon receipt of this information, we are able to address these matters in the appropriate forum. As an added feature of support, parents are encouraged to reach out to their child’s teacher to discuss any issues of concern. The teachers, Parent Coordinator, and administrators work together so that matters are promptly addressed. As an aspect of the evaluation process, we target specific activities to address the needs of parents. The ENL Department hosts a parent workshop within ten days of the Kindergarten NYSITELL ASSESSMENT, in which the ENL teacher provides a Parent Orientation Workshop in the native language of each parent that includes the Department of Education Parent Orientation Video, in the parent’s native language as a part of the ENL selection process. We host four parent workshops: The Read at Home Program (October 18 from 2:30 to 3;30), Parenting/Providing an Academically Rich Environment (December 15 from 2:30 to 3:30), important questions to ask teachers about their child’s learning, progress reports, report cards and attendance (January 24 from 3:00 to 3:30); Helping your child select a High School (September 30,2018 from 10:15-11:30 AM). In addition, we will invite parents to attend at least three afterschool sessions with their child. In order to notify parents of all of these activities, we send letters written in English and Spanish, the school’s calling post, calls from the Parent Coordinator, and the ENL teachers. All records and attendance will be kept by the presenters of each workshop. Copies will be kept by the Assistant Principal, Ms. Medina. The Parent Coordinator will not be paid with Title III funds. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Institute of Environmental Learning Borough Bronx School Number 015 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tara R. Edmonds Coach Haydee Santino ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Valerie Frade Teacher/Subject Area Ana Royer / Science Teacher/Subject Area Stephen Stillwaggon/ Soc. St Related-Service Provider Emma Santana Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Jacqueline Medina Coach School Counselor Emma Santana Parent Miguelina Martinez Parent Coordinator Aida Abreu Field Support Center Staff Member Jose Ruiz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 49  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 491 Total number of ELLs 61 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.42% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools used in order to assess the early literacy skills of our ENLs are the TC Running Records, Core Knowledge Engage NY, , NYC Benchmarks- fall and spring. The data provides us with each student's ability to rhyme, their phoneme-grapheme correspondence, letter identification, ability to identify sounds provided in words, identify sounds in various word positions, decode, syllable identification, and reading comprehension. This data allows the school to provided instruction and intervention at the appropriate level and to track the students' progress. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? At the beginning of the school year, each ENL student is assessed using Running Records, Core Knowledge, TC Running Records by the ENL Teacher and the classroom teacher. 2018-19 CEP 50  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We will evaluate the success of our program by meeting AYP of ENLs, the number of students that are proficient of the NYSITELL and by the number of students that receive a Level 3 or 4 and the NYS Math and ELA exams. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Each ENL student will participate in a Push-in instructional program where they are serviced by an ENL teacher who collaborates with the classroom teacher. They will also participate in the Extended Day program on Wednesdays and Thursdays. The 60 minute program will focus on literacy, math and preparing the students for the ELA, NYSESLAT and math exams. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses data in order to identify students' weaknesses and focus instruction toward using ESL methodologies and strategies to aid students in improving skills in those areas. First, students receive universal screening . During the screening, we discuss the student's educational/cultural background. Next, we provide a strong instructional program targeting for the students needs including the Hallmarks for Advance Literacies. Then, students are provided with tiered instruction and progress monitoring is provided. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals that after three years of taking the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT , our ELL have achieved proficiency levels in speaking/listening and the majority in reading/writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Each individual ENL student's test results are evaluated and their outcomes are noted. The certified ENL teachers implementing exemplary ESL techniques and methodologies will work to enhance the students reading and writing skills. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In order to support the academic development of our English Language Learners (ELL), PS/MS 15 advocates an English As a New Language push-in instructional model. THe Hallmarks of Advance Litery are used. The ESL Teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher. The program model is heterogeneously grouped with different proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2018-19 CEP 51  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENLs receive the total number of ENL instruction according to the CR 154 requirements for their level (Beginner/Entering, Low Intermediate/Emerging, Intermediate/Transitioning, Advanced/Expanding, Proficient/Commanding. The certified ENL teachers implementing exemplary ENL techniques and methodologies will enhance the students speaking, listening, reading and writing skills. In addition, during the regular school hours, our ENL's also participate in a comprehensive approach to balance literacy. using Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy. Students are exposed to reading, writing, listening, word study and test strategies. The teachers use ESL methodologies to help the ENLs in their classroom. The skills are practiced everyday in a workshop model. Keeping in the Principles of learning and the Conditions of learning in mind, teachers plan for 150 minutes of literacy instruction in grades three through five (3-5), and 135 minutes for grades six through eight (6-8). In order ensure that the students are receiving the ENLinstructional minutes they require (Entering and Emerging) 360 minutes per week and Advanced 180 minutes per week, 90 minutes Proficient), the teachers and students follow a program that indicates the periods that are slotted for additional ESL instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In order to make content areas comprehensible in our English as a Second Language Pull-out program model in grades 1,2 and 3, the ENL teacher introduces the students to the different vocabulary, uses various materials, and focuses instruction using strategies they need to succeed in the different subjects (math, science, social studies). In the Push-In model the ENL teacher works with the ENL's in collaboration with the classroom teacher to provide the students with the vocabulary, strategies (graphs, video, pictures, etc.) they need to make the content comprehensible. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Once the child is identified as an ENL he/she is administered the NYSITELL. If the child does not receive a passing grade in the NYSITELL, he/she will be administered the LAB-R in Spanish. The child is also interviewed in his native language. The parent is asked questions concerning the child's prior school, extra curriculum activities and the language he uses at home and with friends. Since we have a Free Standing ENL program, we do not track the student's native language progression. On the other hand, we know the importance of acknowledging a student's language and culture and how important this is to their education, we provide them with books in their native language and celebrate their culture through books, projects, trips and their own publishing celebration-they as authors of their own stories , and assemblies. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. At present, we have no SIFE students b. The newcomer ENL's participate in a Push In and Push-out instructional Model with a licensed ESL teacher. The students will meet for the total number of ENL minutes required by CR Part 154 according to their level. The ENL teacher will use instructional strategies to support the development of speaking, listening, reading and writing. In addition, a comprehensive approach to balance literacy will be implemented. The students will have 150 minutes of literacy instruction which will expose them to listening, speaking, reading, writing, word study and test strategies. The skills will be practiced everyday in a workshop format. The students' growth will be monitored through the use of ENL Periodic Assessment, teacher-made assessment, NYS tests, conferencing, portfolios, etc. This assessment will drive instruction. Appropriate materials that will help develop the students' speaking, listening, reading and writing will be used. During the school year, ENL's will attend the extended day program. The program will be held after school on Wednesdays and Thursdays. The 90 minute program will focus on literacy, math and preparing the students for the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math exams. 2018-19 CEP 52  c. ENL's receiving service 4 to 6 years participate in a ENL Push In Instructional Model with a licensed ENL teacher. Working with the literacy and ENL teacher, the ENL's needs are evaluated and materials and strategies are used to meet those needs. They also attend the extended day program. The program will be held after school on Wednesday and Thursdays. The 90 minute program will focus on literacy, math and preparing the students for the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math exams. The ENL teacher differentiates instruction by evaluating the students' needs and providing them with vocabulary, scaffolding of the materials use, and the strategies they need in order to function academically in English. d. Long-Term ENL's participate in a Push In Instructional Model with a licensed ESL teacher. During the school, the ELL's will attend the extended day program. The program will be held after school on Wednesday and Thursday s. The 90 minute program will focus on literacy, math and preparing the students for the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math exams. e. Our Proficient ENL's are supported with 90 minutes of ENL. They also participate in the extended day program for 90 minutes two days a week (Wednesdays and Thursdays). The students progress is also monitored and assistance is given through conferencing and small group instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In collaboration with the classroom teacher, ENL teacher providers the ENL-SWD's with the following strategies: scaffolding, use visuals ( such as graphic organizers, story maps, word banks),introduce vocabulary (specific terms, technical and common words), simplify text book language and make it more comprehensible, select words that convey key concepts and are relevant to the bulk of the content being learned and have meaning in the lives of the students. The teachers will use grade level material that are easy to understand but teaches the same context. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ENL-SWD's are afforded equal access to all school programs. The students participate in the 371/2 minutes of intensive instruction three times a week; participate in a Push-In model program for the total number of ENL minutes required according to their level where a certified ESL teacher works in collaboration with the classroom teacher; they participate in a comprehensive approach to balanced literacy for 150 minutes literacy instruction in grades three to five (3-5) and 135 minutes in grades six to eight (6-8). ENL's in the 7th grade participate in club periods every Friday. The students are given an opportunity to select the club of their choice which range from photography, book club, computers, etc. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The ENL's participate in a comprehensive approach to balanced literacy using the Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy.. Keeping the Principles of learning and the Conditions of Learning in mind to make content comprehensible and foster language development to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, the teacher plans for 150 minutes of literacy instruction(in English) in grades one through five (1-5) and 135 minutes for grades six through eight (6-8) every day. The students also receive 90 minutes of math instruction every day. Through the use of NYS tests, teacher-made assessment, Periodic Assessments, conferencing and portfolios the student's needs are evaluated. The teachers work towards meeting the student's needs through small group instruction, individual instruction and conferencing. These needs are also met through their participation in the extended ENL day program for 90 minutes two days a week (Wednesdays and Thursdays).In Social Studies and Science, ENL's received 45 minutes of targeted support. ALL ENL's are integrated into general education classes and receive support in their native language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we will continue to improve and implement an interactive computer program. This program allows the students to work on their specific needs with continuous monitoring and evaluations which allows the teacher to see the student's progress and re-teach those strategies that the students need to revisit. The Freestanding ENL Program will be revisited and aligned with the Common Core ESL standards. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 CEP 53  The school will not discontinue any programs for our ENL's. All programs will continue in order to support our ENL's academic and language development growth. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ENL's are afforded equal access to all school programs all curriculum and extra curriculum activities. The ENL's participate in the Track Team, Chess team and all other activities the school has. ENL's also participate in the Title 3 Extended ENL Day program. The program will be held after school on Wednesdays and Thursdays. The 90 minute program will focus on literacy and math and preparing the students for the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math exams. ENL's in the 7th and 8th grades participate in Club Period every Friday. The students are given an opportunity to select the club of their choice which range from photography, computers, community service, etc. ENL's are included in every aspect of the school day. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following instructional materials are used: Hampton-Brown, "Avenues Series", Avenues leveled books, guided reading books, classroom libraries, listening centers," English At Your Command", Intermediate Level, "Getting ready for the NYSESLAT" (Attanasio), "Treasures", (McGraw-Hill). Every classroom is equipped with two or more computers. The children also go the the computer lab. Some of the rooms are equipped with a "Smart Board". The ENL teacher keeps both English and Spanish fiction and non-fiction books in her library for students use. We will use the Teaching Advanced Liteacy Skills, A Guide for Leaders in Linguistically Diverse Schools by Nonie K. Lesaux, Emily Phillips Galloway and Sky H. Marietta text. We are continuously updating our materials to help meet the demands of the new Common Core Learning Standards. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Since we know the importance of acknowledging a student's language and culture and how important this is to their education, we provide them with books in their native language and celebrate their culture through books, projects, trips and their own publishing celebrations- they as authors of the own stories and assemblies. The student's native language is supported through Bilingual and ENL teacher. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All of our ENL's receive all the services they require (SETSS Speech, counseling) according to their individual needs or their IEP. The are also provided with ENL services and are given all the accommodations that they are entitled according to their grades and individual needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The following instructional materials are used: Hampton-Brown, "Avenues Series", Avenues leveled books, guided reading books, classroom libraries, listening centers," English At Your Command", Intermediate Level, "Getting ready for the NYSESLAT" (Attanasio), "Treasures", (McGraw-Hill). Every classroom is equipped with two or more computers. The children also go the the computer lab. Some of the rooms are equipped with a "Smart Board". The ESL teacher keeps both English and Spanish fiction and non-fiction books in her library for students use. We are continuously updating our materials to help meet the demands of the new Common Core Learning Standards. the Teaching Advanced Liteacy Skills, A Guide for Leaders in Linguistically Diverse Schools by Nonie K. Lesaux, Emily Phillips Galloway and Sky H. Marietta text. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before beginning the school year, our ENL's who are enrolled in our school are given a list of books that will help them prepare for the following year. They are also given information about programs available to them during the summer that can assist them academically and foster their language development (museums, plays, library activities) and strategies they can use at home to help their children in reading and math. ELL's enrolled throughout the school year are evaluated and are provided 2018-19 CEP 54  with all the programs they need to help them to succeeded academically. The ENL teacher and Guidance Counselor are there to provide assistance, support to help them with their transition. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our professional development plan include the following: monthly workshops are given where teachers learn new strategies and methodologies and re-visit techniques that help to improve their teaching. During weekly team meetings, teachers, coaches and supervisors will address the methodologies that will help our ENL's in achieving their academic (CALP) English. The ENL teacher is a member of several teacher team meetings (inquiry work, Common Core Learning Standards) and she provides professional support and techniques that help our common branch teachers meet the needs of our ENL's. The parent coordinator holds various workshops with the school support staff to address the culture relevance of ELL. The Assistant Principal attends workshops on helping develop the academic growth of ENL's and disseminates the information to the ENL teachers. Throughout the year, the teachers of ENL's attend monthly workshops that help them to understand the Common Core Learning standards and how to help their students. The teachers also have weekly meetings in grade-level and subject to help them further understand the Common Core Learning and also provide them with materials to further their understanding. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to meet the professional development requirement as per CR part 154.2 (teachers 15% and ENL teachers 50%), the following is in place: New teachers are trained as per Jose P., teachers attend workshops which are dedicated to language acquisition, practices of co-teaching, integrating language, and content instructionnfor ENL learners. The common branch teachers and the ENL teachers have weekly meetings in grade-level subjects to understand the curriculum and strategies to best service our ENL learners. In addition, the ENL teachers attend monthly workshops with district personnel that focus on ENL techniques and methodologies. All agendas and attendance is kept by the Assistant Principal in charge of the professional Development. 2018-19 CEP 55  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides quarterly meeting with the parents in order to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content area. All meetings are held in the parents native language in person or over-the-phone. Every Tuesday during the school year, the ENL teachers have an opportunity to meet with parents or communicate with them over the phone. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement is foster in various ways. We arrange many activities throughout the school year, which promote active parental engagement. Our activities include, but are not limited to, Back to school Kick offs, Parent/teacher conferences, school assemblies, workshops, Parent/Teacher Association (PTA) and School Leadership (SLT) meetings. Parents and Guardians are also encouraged to schedule meetings with their child's teachers, administrators, Guidance Counselor, and the Parent Coordinator to address any academic concerns. There is also an orientation for the parents of all ENL's which explains the different programs choices (Transitional Bilingual, Dual Language, Freestanding ENL), and the examinations use to evaluate the students (LAB-R, NYSESLAT). All these activities are presented in the parents native language (Spanish). All activities are translated into the parent's native language through school staff translation or the translation unit. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 56 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tara Edmonds, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Institute of Environ Lrng School DBN: 10x015 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Tara R. Edmonds Jacqueline Medina-Sciarrone Title Principal Assistant Principal N/A Parent Coordinator Valerie Frade ENL/Bilingual Teacher Miguelina Martinez Parent Ana Royer Teacher/Subject Area Stephen Stillwaggon Teacher/Subject Area Haydee Santino Coach Coach Emma Sanatan Calero School Counselor Maribel Hulla Jose Ruiz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Dr. Olga Glenn Other Ms. Socorro Diaz Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 58  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x015 School Name: The Inst. of Envrn Lrng @ PS/MS 15 Superintendent: MaribelHulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jacqueline Medina Sciarrone Assistant Principal No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We reviewed our Home Language Surveys, NYCDOE Progress Report Card, Learning Environment Surveys and Oral Language Reports to assess our school’s written translation and oral interpretation. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The preferred parents' languages for oral and written The preferred parents' languages for written communication at The percent of written communication is 51.78 percent English The preferred parents' languages for oral communication at The percent of oral communication is 51.78 percent English 2018-19 CEP 59  communication at PS/MS 15 are English PS/MS 15 are English and Spanish. and 47.63 percent Spanish. PS/MS 15 are English and Spanish. and 47.63 percent Spanish. The preferred parents' languages for oral communication is Bengali. The preferred parents' languages for written communication at PS/MS 15 are English The preferred parents' languages for oral communication is Hausa. The preferred parents' languages for written communication at PS/MS 15 are English The preferred parents' languages for oral communication is Spanish The preferred parents' languages for written communication at PS/MS 15 is Spanish. The percent of written communication is 51.78 percent English The percent of written communication is 51.78 percent English The percent of written communication is 47.63 percent Spanish. The preferred parents' languages for oral communication at PS/MS 15 is English The preferred parents' languages for oral communication at PS/MS 15 is English The preferred parents' languages for oral communication at PS/MS 15 is Spanish. The percent of oral communication is 51.78 percent English The percent of oral communication is 51.78 percent English The percent of oral communication is 47.63 percent Spanish. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. From the languages provided in the previous question, the other languages represented only present 0.3% population of the school. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families The following documents will be disseminated every year in both Spanish and English: The PS/MS 15 Parent Handbook, ,all Flyers, Testing information, Student, Curriculum and Letters from the school leadership. September 2018 - June 2019 the Parent newsletter, September 2018- June 2019 the schoolwide monthly calendar September 2018 - June 2019 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All materials will be translated in English and Spanish. All materials will be translated and sent home to families as they become available. All materials will be translated in English and Spanish. All materials will be translated and sent home to families as they become available. All materials will be translated in English and Spanish. 2018-19 CEP 60  the NYC Discipline Code September 2018 - June 2019 All materials will be translated and sent home to families as they become available. All materials will be translated in English and Spanish. All materials will be translated and sent home to families as they become available. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parents will have numerous opportunities to interact with the school community throughout the year through quarterly parent-teacher conferences, Curriculum meetings, PTA Meetings, meetings with the guidance counselor ie. PPT , High School and Middle School application process meetings,Breakfast chats with the Principal and PS/MS 15 welcomes Parents with an open door policy. September 2018 - June 2019 Weekly Parent Engagement opportunities, September 2018 - June 2019 Outreach with the attendance teacher/team, September 2018- June 2019 IEP Meetings, September 2018- June 2019 Our school plans to provide interpretation services by in-house staff using our assistant principal, parent coordinator, teachers, family workers, guidance counselor, school aides and parent volunteers. Our school plans to provide interpretation services by in-house staff using our assistant principal, parent coordinator, teachers, family workers, guidance counselor, school aides and parent volunteers. Our school plans to provide interpretation services by in-house staff using our assistant principal, parent coordinator, teachers, family workers, guidance counselor, school aides and parent volunteers. Our school plans to provide interpretation services by in-house staff using our assistant principal, parent coordinator, teachers, family workers, guidance counselor, school aides and parent volunteers. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 61  In the event of an emergency, we will use the robo-call that translates all calls into English and Spanish. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of the Chancellor Regulation A-663 in order to provide translation in the Parents preferred written and oral language through professional development, the use of the making information available through the translation unit and through conversations with colleagues. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Written translation will be provided in-house by school staff. Articles to be translated will be the monthly calendar, all memorandums and individual parent letters (as needed). Oral interpretation will be provided by in-house staff that is fluent in the parent's native language. Members that will translate include but are not limited to: Parent coordinator, guidance counselor, Administration and teachers. In addition, vendor translation services will be used as needed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will use in-house parent surveys, Parent-Teacher Association Meetings feedback and NYCDOE Parent Surveys in order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 CEP 62 
