2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X018 School Name: P.S. 018 JOHN PETER ZENGER Principal: LAUREN SEWELL-WALKER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: John Peter Zenger 320700100018 PreK-5 502 Morris Ave, Bronx, NY 10451 718-292-2868 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 07x018 718-292-2862 Fax: Lauren Sewell-Walker Lsewell3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Lauren Sewell-Walker Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kim Pressley LatichaMcCormick MeeraMangaroo Robert Crispin N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 07 Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtland Avenue, Bronx, NY 10452 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6500 718-742-6548 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  11230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-5643 Phone Number: 718-828-5643 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Lauren Sewell-Walker Kim Pressley LatichaMcCormick Robert Crispin Mia Martinez Janice Badal J'NealJohnson Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Community Learning Schools Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Adriana Galarza TanesiaThomas JeferyCastelon MeeraMangaroo Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 18X Community Learning School exists to serve as a hub of resources for our students, families and school community. The resources provided enrich the lives of all members of our school community through new opportunities and experiences and further the development and success of our students. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. John Peter Zenger, Public School 18 is a Community Learning School situated in District 7 and is located in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx. Our pre-kindergarten to fifth grade school served a diverse population of 606 students during the 2017-2018 school year. Our student population consisted of 294 females, 312 males, 1.3% American Indian or Alaska Native, 64.3% Hispanic, 2.6% White, 29.3% Black or African American, 2.2% Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander and 0.2% Multi-racial.  92% of our students met the Title 1 requirement for free lunch.  Limited Proficient students accounted for 27 % of our school's population and Students with Disabilities accounted for 24.2% of our school's population.  The average attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 91.6% PS 18 is proud to celebrate the growth of its Dual Language program which was initiated in 2016. Our dual language program grades K-2, seeks to provide integrated language proficiency and cross - cultural understanding. Grade Level curriculum in the content areas are taught to all students enrolled in the program in both English and Spanish and is organized around major concepts that students are expected to learn while developing academic language. The instruction in this program is side by side, with students receiving instruction in English and Spanish on alternate days. For the English native speaker, the approach promotes the learning of Spanish as a second language. For the Spanish native speaker this approach solidifies his/her native language, thereby promoting bilingualism for all students enrolled in this program. Teachers of the dual language classes meet weekly to craft instruction, create assessments, with the support of our Bilingual Teacher leader. It is our collective belief that students learn best when provided with a caring and supportive learning environment. P.S. 18 has a variety of programs that develop and foster our students' academic, social, and emotional well-being. As a Community Learning School, we work collaboratively with community partners; Price Water House Financial Literacy, Donors’ Choose for Teachers, Montefiore Mental Health Clinic, Dream RBI, New York Cares, Food Bank for New York City, New York Pantry, NY Parks Department, New York Pops, Boy Scouts of America, New York Yankees, Ballet Tech, Lincoln Hospital and Hostos Community College. These partnerships and programs promote a supportive environment for students, teachers and families. In addition, our school has a variety of supplemental programs, in school and after-school, which enhance our curriculum and provide learning experiences for our students. This entails academic tutorials, sports, field trips, and programs in the arts. These include: School Chorus Soccer Club   Dance Club  Basketball Club   Art Club  Bike Riding Club   Swimming Student Council Students are immersed in art, language arts, mathematics, physical education, science and social studies daily. . We encourage student effort and good behaviors that contribute to a positive communal learning environment through our PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention and Support), Attendance and Character Building programs. Partnerships and programs provide continuous learning opportunities for our students through the arts, sports and other extra curricular activities. This further supports our mission of teaching the whole child by providing supplemental learning opportunities and social-emotional intervention. At Public School 18, we recognize that the support of our families is crucial to the emotional and academic success of our students. Parent workshops are provided on an ongoing basis by our Community School Director and full time 2018-19 CEP 10  Parent Coordinator. Topics of Parent Workshops include Immigration, Common Core Learning Standards, Parenting, Health, Technology, and Cookshop. Parents are encouraged to participate various parent classroom learning activities concluded throughout the school year. . They also support content area instruction through participation in class and school-wide celebrations, class trips, and assemblies. Our school is grounded in the spirit of collaboration and reflection. We have leveraged the use of model teachers, peer collaborative teachers and Teaching Matters consultants to initiate new leadership roles and implement the Inquiry Approach to our teachers' instructional practice. Teachers routinely utilize protocols to analyze student work and share effective instructional practices and structures. During professional meetings, coaches, school leaders and staff, discuss the work, monitor its development and share feedback as to its impact on teacher effectiveness After careful consideration of our school data, we are determined, and committed to effectively creating a learning environment of professionalism and academic rigor within the context of camaraderie, mutual respect, and shared trust. As a community of learners, we continue to seek to improve our instructional practices through professional learning opportunities provided by school-based coaches, Reading Rescue, NTN Mathematics consultants, Teaching Matters consultants, Educate consultants, Brain Power consultants, Office of Teacher Effectiveness and DOE facilitated workshops. During the 2017-2018 school year, we implemented several new collaborative models that involved administrators, educators, and parents. These collaborative models included an additional designated time for professional development for teachers of ENL students, structured planning time by the teachers of students with disabilities to improve the quality of IEPs and compliance, a committee to strategically develop and implement new positive behavior expectations and a school-wide approach to the learning environment, a designated time to collect and track behaviors and correct implementation of Behavior Intervention Plans and participation in the DOE Restorative Practices professional learning sessions. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Proficiency level advancements for the NYSESLAT test indicated 12 students scored in the Commanding range, 51 in the Advanced range and 55 students remained at the same proficiency level. We provide quality services for our English Language Learners (27% of student population) through a variety of instructional programming which includes Dual Language classes , push-in services and utilization of the co-teaching model. Some of our students' needs include related services, ENL supports, learning scaffolds and differentiated modifications to the curriculum. We provide quality mandated services for students with disabilities (24%) through a variety of instructional programming which includes enrichment classes, push-in services and utilization of the co-teaching model for SWD students. Some of our students' needs include related services, social and emotional services, learning scaffolds and differentiated modifications to the curriculum to ensure that students attain specified learning goals as mandated by IEPs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have evidenced growth in the area of Collaborative Teachers as it relates to the Framework for Great Schools ( score of 3.57) . By providing teachers with common planning time, utilizing protocols to strengthen teams, and instituting an Inquiry Approach, our teachers planned for the successful implementation of guided reading lessons for our student learners. In addition to planning, teacher team members participated in classroom visits, learning walks, and met in teams to analyze student work and determine next steps for guided reading lessons. Areas of Focus Elements of the Framework for Great Schools identified an area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year as Supportive Environment, where we evidenced our lowest score (2.50). The Quality Guide 2017-2018 revealed the following scores for Supportive Environment; Safety- 75%, Classroom Behavior- 67%, Social Emotional needs- 83% and Peer Support -63%. Our overall OORS Data Index score of 2.50, was less than the citywide average of 2.97. 2018-19 CEP 11  2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X018 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 603 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 62 61 28 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 10 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 97.0% % Reduced Lunch 29.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 68.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.85 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 24.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 75% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 84 81 90.5% 0.5% 24.5% 25.0% 1.7% 1.0% 4 0% 6.9 24.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive assessment of our school's academic program was completed using information from our Quality Review (2017-2018), New York State Performance Indicator (2017-2018), Principal Performance Review (2017-2018), Learning Surveys, ADVANCE ratings and school-based assessment data (2017-2018). Strengths in the element:  Improvement was demonstrated in overall student performance in both New York State English Language Arts (6% increase) and Mathematics (0.5% increase) assessments for students in grades 3-5 during the 2017-2018 school year.  Planning documents reflect revised lessons to include skills from lessons that were previously taught.  Planning documents reflect integration of literacy writing standards with an emphasis on citing evidence from varied sources.  Across grades and content areas, lessons and unit plans have been adapted to include opportunities to re-teach the skill addressed.  Adjustments were made to curricula and unit plans to enable cluster teachers to push-in to classes to check for understanding, re-teach skills that were not being mastered and make adjustments that would allow ENL and Students with Disabilities access to the content being taught.  Various scaffolds and support tools are embedded into curriculum plans to help students navigate a variety of complex grade level text.  Adjustments to instructional schedule(school-wide guided reading block) in order to support continuity of instruction. Priority needs for this element:  Build teacher capacity to consistently implement rigorous tasks that promote students' critical thinking skills. School Quality Guide (2017-2018) reflected a score of 2.97 for Rigorous Instruction, -0.75 as compared to the District Average and -0.69 as compared to the City Average.  Provide allotted time for staff to clarify what rigor is based on the Hess Depth of Knowledge levels of recall, skills/concepts, strategic thinking/reasoning and extended thinking. Overall ADVANCE ratings support the need for explicit professional learning in this area as evidenced by overall ratings in the following components- Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques (2.54), Engaging Students in Learning (2.59), Using Assessment in Instruction (2.53). School-wide assessment plan to gather, monitor and analyze data in a timely manner.  2018-19 CEP 14   Build teacher capacity around their use of strategies such as checks for understanding, providing targeted feedback and student self-assessment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will collaboratively implement a rigorous, research based literacy block resulting in 75% percent of general education students making one year's worth of reading gains and two-thirds of a year's growth for ENL and SWDs as measured by Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Teachers will work collaboratively with literacy All Teachers consultants and teacher leaders to plan and implement a school-wide guided reading block and phonics block.  Teacher Teams will conduct review and analyze literacy data and build a Problem of Practice to address students' gaps in learning.  Observe teachers implementing balanced literacy and  provide feedback on planning balanced literacy lessons- ex: guided reading sessions modeled by instructional coach Instructional support staff will provide professional learning sessions during Monday PLs, Lunch and Learn, Team Meetings and after-school workshops based on teacher surveys and interests.  Targeted Professional Learning for teachers of ENLs and SWDs  Teachers of SWDs will meet monthly with IEP teacher to engage in IEP progress monitoring activities to ensure that instructional plans are aligned to individual students' needs.  Teachers of ENLs will engage in weekly collaborative meetings with grade teams to align instructional practices for students. Administrative staff will meet with teachers to review instructional activities and to adjust the scope and sequence of the units of study to ensure alignment with key Common Core Standards and Instructional Shifts. ● Learning Walks ● Review of Portfolios and Student Assessment Folders ● Creating formative assessments to drive instruction Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team Coaches Consultants Borough Field Support Personnel IEP Teacher Bilingual Support Specialist ENL Students SWD Students All Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team Coaches Consultants 2018-19 CEP 16  ● Programming of common preps for each grade to engage in revising or development of learning activities Use of system to track teachers’ implementation of feedback provided during observations. ● Professional Learning conversations aimed at monitoring teachers’ implementation of next steps. Focused administrative walk-throughs will be held weekly to provide timely feedback to teachers that align with the Danielson Framework for Teaching  Continue to work with Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach to ensure coherence in the quality of the administrators' written feedback to teachers  Teacher Center coach will provide a series of workshops which will allow opportunities to engage in dissecting the Danielson Framework for Teaching. ● Written or verbal feedback provided within forty- eight hours of observation. ● Job-embedded support from NYCDOE Coach ● Use of Observation Tracking System  Use of system to track teachers’ implementation of feedback provided during observations. ● Professional Learning conversations aimed at monitoring teachers’ implementation of next steps  Teachers will inform parents of student growth on school Progress Reports In December 2018 and May 2019. All Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Consultants  The school will track student progress in Literacy and All Teachers Sept. 2018 Administrative Team Mathematics performance by administering four school-wide assessments in September 2018, December 2018, March 2019 and June 2019. June 2019 . In response to an IIT school visit conducted by NY State; All teachers February 27th 2019- Literacy Coach 2018-19 CEP 17 The principal and AP will work with universal literacy and instructional coaches to place an order for additional books for the school that are of interest to students and appropriate for students at different reading levels. March 4, 2019 Principal Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Teachers will address grade curriculum expectations and assessment system as it relates to Common Core and Rigorous Instruction in September during parent Teacher Conferences. Activities will include parent support as it relates to English Language Arts, Mathematics, Writing, Social Studies and Science. Point Persons- principal, parent coordinator  Teachers provide information regarding curriculum in monthly newsletter, (September 2018- June 2019) Point Persons- teachers, parent coordinator  Parent Coordinator, Teacher Center Coach, and Assistant Principals will conduct monthly workshops with parents (September 2018- June 2019). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. • Literacy and Bilingual Consultants • New York Department of Education professional learning sessions • Per session and per diem funding to support professional learning initiatives ((approximately 100 hours) • Common planning periods, Monday Professional Learning sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded X In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will collaboratively implement a rigorous, research based literacy block resulting in 45% percent of general education students making one-half year's reading gains and one-third of ENL and SWDs as measured by Fountas and Pinnell assessments and school-wide benchmark assessments. • Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Assessment Administration (February 2019) 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As it relates to the Capacity Framework element, Supportive Environment, we will continue to implement a structured school-wide behavior system with a focus on restorative practices. . Quality Guide 2017-2018 revealed the following scores for Supportive Environment: Safety- 75%, Classroom Behavior- 67%, Social Emotional needs- 83% and Peer Support -63%. Our overall OORS Data Index score of 2.50 was less than the citywide average of 2.97. Strengths in the element:  We have implemented various approaches and forged several partnerships with the aim of cultivating a  positive school culture. School-wide practices that seek to build an inclusive learning community; Class Dojo, Brain Power, Daily Announcements, Birthday Bulletin Board, Morning Meetings, Morning/Dismissal Meet and Greet by administrative team and out of classroom personnel.  Crisis Team and Attendance Team meets regularly to create action plans as needed.    School Support Staff deliver Respect for All lessons during school year. Student Volunteer Program (Service In Schools-Student monitors) Lunch Clubs for supporting students with individualized needs Priority needs for this element:  We recognize that our students’ emotional and social health impacts their ability to successfully navigate the school day. P.S. 18 will continue to build on the success of the revised school wide behavior support system during the 2018-2019 school year. After conducting our needs assessment and reflecting on the feedback from our school’s consultation committee, the school will focus more on restorative practices outlined in the NYCDOE Discipline Code to strengthen teacher-student relationships and focus on positive targeted behaviors.  We will continue to utilize Brain Power mentors and leaders to team build and implement restorative practices  Provide professional learning (restorative practices) for school personnel. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 20  By June 2019, teachers will implement a restorative practice, self-monitoring menu to utilize in conjunction with our school-wide behavior plan as measured by a 50% decrease in levels 3 an 4 incidences as measured by our OORS data index score for the 2018-209 school year. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Training will begin in October of 2018 and conclude in All Teachers Sept.2018-June 2019 Administrative Staff January of 2019.  Revisit P.S. 18’s Beehive Behavioral Supports and Restorative Practices during professional learning sessions and Team meetings throughout the school year. Identify plans to improve and connect the Beehive Program to student behavior and update our Spirit Week with new events.    Students will continue to earn points by using the Class Dojo website. It will be a school wide expectation that all teachers use class dojo to reward expected behaviors. Out of classroom teachers and staff will be linked to the individual classrooms so that all stakeholders can compliment/reward a student for demonstrating exemplary behavior. SWDS and ENLs all grades supplemental programs (STEM, Arts, Wellness, Trips) through grants secured by the Community Learning School Liaison  Conduct a variety of school events (School Dances, Talent Shows, Movie Nights, etc.) throughout the year where students will be allowed admission based on the points they have earned. Guidance Counselor All students Crisis Team All Teachers Sept.2018-June 2019 All staff members All students SWD students ENL students All Staff Sept. 2018- Administrative Staff Therapeutic Crisis Intervention and P.S. 18’s Crisis Response Team June 2019 Guidance Counselor  Continue to provide Therapeutic Crisis Intervention training to our staff with a focus on educational assistants.  Revisit school’s incident reporting form to include students’ needs so that our student support team can reflect on a student incident and provide the student Crisis Team Teachers Brain Power REP Program 2018-19 CEP 22 with the appropriate restorative practices to build coping skills and prevention strategies. Class Dojo parent meetings to assist parents in monitoring student behavior Parent Meetings (Parent Engagement Tuesdays) Parents Sept. 2018- Parent Coordinator June 2019 Guidance Counselor Classroom teachers Classroom teachers Parents Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Distribution of Discipline Code Blue Book- Fall 2019 (Point Persons-Crisis Team)  Restorative Conference parent meetings- Guidance Counselor (ongoing September 2018 - June 2019)  Individual Class Behavior Plan discussed during Parent Teacher Conference (September 13, 2018) Point Persons- Classroom Teachers  Guidance Counselor will present workshops on appropriate guidance Interventions as per the Citywide Behavior Expectations (September 2018 - June 2019). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Brain Power Consultants ● Bronx Field Office Professional Learning sessions ● Community Based Organizations: New York Cares, Community Learning Schools ● Per session and per diem funding to support student activities (approximately 75 hours) Guest speakers and groups for assemblies 2018-19 CEP 23  Incentives: Trips, books, medals, certificates REP Program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will implement a restorative practice, self-monitoring menu to utilize in conjunction with our school-wide behavior plan as evidenced by in a 25% decrease in levels 4 and 5 incidents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYCDOE data reports (OORS- Online Occurrence Reporting System) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms through the utilization of a blended learning platform (Google Classrooms). Teachers collaboratively create differentiated learning tasks, assessments, rubrics and grading policies that offer a clear portrait of student mastery. Data reviewed (Quality Review, ADVANCE , teacher and student surveys) indicate Strengths in the element:  Teachers effectively created differentiated reading and writing tasks for students using Google Slides and Google Classroom.  Teachers are provided feedback on student work through comments on individual slides.   Teachers are engaged in structure, inquiry-base professional collaborations that strengthen the instructional Students use Google Docs to create guided reading and writing tasks. capacity of teachers and support student achievement. Priority needs for this element:  After conducting a needs assessment survey with K-2 staff in June 2018, 89% of teachers expressed interest in piloting Google Classroom as a phonics station.  Centralize, create and upload important documents and teacher made videos that will help staff increase content knowledge, upload teacher created student tools and graphic organizers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of Teacher Teams in Grades 2-5 will utilize Google Suite for Education, I-Ready, and other learning tools during literacy centers, resulting in 75% of Gen Ed students making one year’s worth of reading gains and 2/3 of a year growth for ENLs and SWDs as measured by Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment system. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Partnership with Educate LLC. Google Classroom and Google Apps for Education. The Educate LLC coach and leadership team will create a PD menu for teachers to engage in a variety of professional development learning sessions catered to their learning needs in technology. Strategic PD groups will be set up to support and challenge teachers. Teachers and Students Sept. 2018-May 2019 Educate LLC, Kyle Liao Administrative Staff Teacher Leaders P.S. 18 will work with Educate LLC to provide our teachers with a personalized professional development plan that builds upon teachers’ successes and implementation with Google Classroom during the 2017-2018 school year. This year 75% of teachers trained in Google Classroom will participate in differentiated, teacher led professional development sessions. Select teachers will lead advanced Google Classroom sessions to continue creating rigorous extension activities during the literacy block. Beginners and Intermediate teachers will continue to participate in labsites with a side by side coaching model that allows teachers to increase their content knowledge and design students’ instructional tools. Using Google Classroom will allow teachers to plan rigorous online academic tasks, encourage collaboration, design and implement differentiated learning tasks, and enhance their publishing options. All Teachers Sept 2018- Educate LLC May 2019 Administrative Staff Teacher Leaders Educate coach will continue working with teachers in grades 2-5, focusing on in-class support and one on one coaching conferences. All Teachers November 2018-June 2019 Educate LLC Administrative Staff Teacher Leaders 2018-19 CEP 26 Teachers will continue to develop a digital learning community around the use of Google Classroom through learning walks and teacher-led PD’s. Regular sharing of classroom and Advance data with teachers to set goals for strengthening teacher practice focusing on 3C(Engaging Students in Learning), through the implementation of differentiated tasks utilizing Google Classrooms. All Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Educate LLC Administrative Staff Teacher Leaders Teacher teams will continue to meet on a regular basis throughout the year to focus on targeted subgroups of students including ENLs and SWDs . The teacher teams will collect and analyze data, including student work products, in order to review the impact of instructional strategies, reflect on work efforts, make changes to teacher practice and set goals for students learning by assessing progress toward meeting June goals. Teachers of ENLs/SWDs Sept. 2018-June 2019 Educate LLC Administrative Staff Teachers Consultants 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  The parent coordinator will strengthen work conducted with Educate Coach (2018-2019) to create a digital presentation that the parent coordinator will use during a variety of parent meetings (i.e. PTA meetings, Monthly parent meetings,etc) to explain in further detail the action plan and goals September 2018 -June 2019.  Parents will also be invited to culminating student presentations to celebrate units created in Google Classrooms. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Educate LLC Consultants (Instructional Resources) Teaching Matters consultant (Instructional Resources) Teacher Leaders Meetings (Schedule Adjustments) Teacher Per session/Supervisor per session and per diem funding to support student activities 2018-19 CEP 27  Teacher Team Meetings (Schedule Adjustments) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 25% of teachers we will utilize technology to craft differentiated tasks for students resulting in an increase in reading levels as measured by Fountas and Pinnell assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our vision for leadership is to ensure that a system to evaluate and adjust curricular and instructional practices is evident and transparent, Principals' Performance Review, Quality Review, ADVANCE and School Learning Survey were used to evaluate this area of focus. Strengths in the element:  Administrative Team supports the development of teachers with effective next steps from cycles of classroom observations. School Professional Learning as well as targeted supports from coaches is developed from a regular analysis of teacher feedback. Structure to communicate with consultants including feedback via email and in person conversations school leaders hold bi-weekly meetings with instructional team to evaluate school level decisions.    Priority needs for this element  Teachers have begun video-taping themselves to share best practices. Meet with school's Instructional Team to align this work to common instructional strategies associated with the school's belief about how students' learn best.  Align school's assessment calendar to Teacher Team's inquiry cycles to ensure greater alignment and more opportunity for target supports for students and staff.  Create systems for maintaining, analyzing and monitoring student data on a more granular level in order to meet the needs of our student learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administrators, teacher leaders and coaches will collaboratively monitor school-wide guided reading and phonics instruction, resulting in 75% percent of general education students making one year's worth of reading gains and two-thirds of a year growth for ENLs and SWDs as measured by Fountas and Pinnell reading levels. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Vertical and professional development teacher teams work collaboratively with school leaders to make decisions regarding instructional supports. Regular sharing of classroom and Advance data with teachers to set goals for strengthening teacher practice. Teacher Leaders meet regularly with teachers providing supports in the form of lesson planning, demonstrations lessons, intervisitations and conferencing. Administrative Team attends common planning periods with grades to support and reflect on instructional practices and student achievement All Teachers Sept.2018 Administrative Team December 2019 February 2019 Teacher Leaders Model Teacher March 2019 May 2019 Literacy and Mathematics Consultants Sept.2018-June 2019 Sept.2018-June 2019 Teachers will use appropriate data to inform instructional planning and delivery based on student needs. All Teachers Sept.2018-June 2019 Administrative Team 2018-19 CEP 30  Consultant will support teachers in collecting and using formative assessment data from a variety of sources (conferencing, observing, questioning and looking at student work) in order to create instructional groups and adjust to student needs through out a lesson. Teacher Leaders Model Teacher Literacy and Mathematics Consultants Sept.2018-June 2019 Teachers will be encouraged attend to external professional development to strengthen their practice in alignment with component 4E (Danielson Framework).Time will be provided fo reflection and sharing of learned best practices. Consultants will continue to facilitate teachers in working as a community, both as learners and teachers. Teachers will observe and discuss lessons and instruction using a non-judgmental protocol. All teachers Sept.2018-June 2019 Administrative Team Teacher Leaders Sept.2018-June 2019 Model Teacher Literacy and Mathematics Consultants Administrative team will conduct observations to identify and support effective teaching practices for students with lens on ENLs and SWDs.. Teachers of ENLs and SWDs Sept.2018-June 2019 Administrative Team Teacher Leaders Model Teacher 2018-19 CEP 31 Literacy and Mathematics Consultants Bilingual Consultant In response to an IIT school visit conducted by NY State; All teachers Provide professional development regarding how to access, interpret, and use NYSESLAT data to identify student needs and to determine appropriate strategies for working with ENL students, as an initial step toward better meeting the learning needs of these students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Administrative Team meets with parents and teachers together as needed to address student achievement. September 2018-June 2019  Administrative Team meets with Parent Association and board to collaborate and share school instructional focus and goals. September 2018- June 2019  Teachers will distribute Common Core aligned progress reports throughout the year to inform parents of student progress. December 2018, March 2019  Curriculum based parent workshops provided by Parent Coordinator, IEP Teacher, Lead Teachers. September 2018-June 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School-based support Staff Bronx Field Office Support staff NYC Department of Education workshops Per session and per diem funding to support student activities (approximately 75 hours) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will collaboratively monitor school-wide literacy instruction resulting in 45% percent of general education students making gains in reading levels as measured by Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment. - Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. All members of our school community know that parental involvement is a crucial component to the academic and social-emotional well-being of a child and therefore will strive to ensure that all parents feel welcomed. Strengths in the element:  Results of our School Quality Snapshot (2017-2018) revealed that 96% of parents were satisfied with the education that their child received.  Communication with parents via monthly calendar, monthly class newsletters, Phone Blaster announcements, Community Learning School Initiatives (Food Bank, support services)  Parent Engagement Tuesday workshops on varying topics, all designed to support their children.  Communication in English and Spanish. Priority needs for this element:  Despite parents' satisfaction ratings, we are challenged by low attendance at parent meetings, Parent-Engagement Tuesday activities and other school wide parent initiatives.  Parent Handbook to make our parents aware of school policies and events.  Digital invites to school functions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all stakeholders will use various methods of engagement to build community efficacy that will strengthen the parent partnerships resulting in a 30% increase in parent attendance as measured by monthly PCAR reports. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Distribute needs survey to parents in September 2018 in order to tailor meetings and workshops to the needs and interests of our parents in order to support learning at home. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents Sept.2018 Parent Coordinator Administrative Staff Teachers CBOs Work in collaboration with Community Learning School resource coordinator to plan workshops and trips for parents at various times on differentiated topics. Parents Sept.2018-June 2019 Resource Coordinator Parent Coordinator Administrative Staff Teachers CBOs Parents Sept.2018 Parent Coordinator November 2019 March 2019 May 2019 Administrative Staff Teachers CBOs Teachers will keep parents informed of students’ progress. Activities and strategies are designed to increase parent involvement and support student outcomes. • Progress reports, PTCs • Newsletters • Tuesday Parent Engagement Workshops • Classroom teachers meet 1:1 with parents or with school support team • Classroom teacher phone conferences • Informal, individual or small groups informational session based on parents’ request 2018-19 CEP 35 Parent workshops specific to parents of ENL and SWD students. These include but are not limited to orientation in September. Parents are provided information regarding their child’s education in their native language. Parents Sept. 2017-June 2019 Resource Coordinator Parent Coordinator Administrative Staff Teachers CBOs Principal Assistant Principals School Crisis Team In response to an IIT school visit conducted by NY State; Parents The principal will develop and implement a plan to increase the number of teachers and parents that are using Class Dojo as a way to regularly communicate regarding student needs and progress. Teachers Students February 8, 2019- March 1, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  Community Learning School Initiative Food Bank of New York  Lincoln Hospital   Hostos College  New York Cares  Price Water House  Dream RBI Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds for Global Connect and SLT Translation funds for parent meetings Per session and per diem for staff members (approximately 50 hours) Parent Coordinator CBOs Community Learning School Liaison Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all stakeholders will use various methods of engagement to build community efficacy that will strengthen the parent partnerships resulting in a 15% increase in parent attendance as measured by monthly PCAR reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PCAR reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services are provided in whole /small group or one- to-one, push –in as needed. Monday – Friday, One Period Each Day (8:1) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grades 3 - 5 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Literacy Curriculum ELA scale score Assessment data is used to determine the need for student intervention services. e.g. ELA State Exam scores, hold –overs, DRA reading levels, unit assessments Lowest performing on NYS ELA Test Grades K-2 Hold-overs DRA2 - Lowest 20% Class work Teacher Feedback Is modified to ensure it is aligned to the Common Core Standards. Teachers also provide Guided Reading lessons, conferences, Interactive Read Alouds, Interactive Writing and Shared Reading Lessons to support and enhance the needs of students. Response to Intervention Specialist assists struggling students needing Tier 2 &3 intervention to determine a plan of actions and services for students in need. Computer Based Programs – 2018-19 CEP 38 Teachers provide guided math Monday – Friday, One Period Each Day instruction in a small group setting. One-to-one conferences are also incorporated to ensure students’ individual needs are met Mathematics Grades 3-5 Math scale score Assessment data is used to determine student intervention services. e.g. Math State Exam Scores, hold-overs, base-line, mid-line and end line, unit assessments Raz Kids Reading A to Z , Imagine Learning, Study Island. Teachers also provide Guided Mathematics lessons and conferences. Response to Intervention Specialist assists struggling students needing Tier 2 &3 intervention to determine a plan of actions and services for students in need. Lowest on NYS Mathematics Test Support K-2 Hold-overs Go Math assessments On the Go Math Study Island Go Math School based created curriculum aligned to CCLS Lowest 20% Science Teacher Feedback Class work Science Assessment data is used to determine student intervention services. Lessons are aligned to the Common Core Standards. Additional support is provided Services are provided in whole /small group or one- to-one as needed Services are provided during the school day as needed by the science cluster teacher for all grades Classroom assessments 2018-19 CEP 39  Social Studies School benchmarks Class work Teacher Feedback Social Studies Assessment data is used to determine student intervention services. Classroom assessments School benchmarks Class work Lessons are aligned to the Common Core Standards. Teachers provide extra instructional support in a small Services are provided during the school day as needed The teachers use non-fiction Social Studies content to create units of study that support teaching literacy through the content areas group setting. One-to-one conferences are also incorporated to ensure students’ individual needs are met. Teacher Feedback At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students deemed at risk, social /emotional, academic needs Hold-overs PPT referrals Chronic Absentees Teacher Feedback STH The school guidance counselor works on Services are provided in a small group or one-to-one setting addressing study skills, stress/anger management, depending on the needs of each At risk students are pulled out to provide services during the school day. If students need further individual student. services the school implementation team arranges with parent for student to receive additional services as needed. relaxation techniques, peer counseling, grief counseling, conflict resolution and goal setting. The mandated psychologist meets with at risk and mandated students and recommends outside services as needed. 2018-19 CEP 40  The school nurse trains asthmatic students on asthma care and prevention (Open Airways) 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) One hundred and twenty- five students. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Purchases include school supplies, clothing and personal needs of students. For example, uniforms, coats, shoes, sneakers, toiletries, books, glasses. After-school services will be provided to address both academic and emotional concerns of students. School's guidance counselor will provide families with any intervention or support services as needed. The services provided support students academic progress. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 42  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 43  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. At Public School 18, we have implemented a number of strategies and structural changes to ensure that teachers are highly qualified as defined by Elementary and Secondary Education Act and are highly effective in their teaching practice.  Candidates are screened and selected from NYCDOE Open Market System  Attendance at recruitment fairs  A hiring committee is formed with staff and parent representatives  The hiring committee interviews all candidates  Candidates conduct a demonstration lesson viewed by hiring committee.  The hiring committee rates each candidate based on their responses to interview questions and model lesson.  Teachers who are not highly qualified will be given the opportunity to take courses to become qualified in their assignment for 2018-2019. Title I funds will be set aside to assist such teachers to become highly  qualified (ex. Reimbursement for tuition cost, workshop attendance, etc.). Professional learning is ongoing throughout the year through school-based peer coaches, UFT Teacher Center, literacy and mathematics consultants and professional learning sessions offered by the borough and city. Support will include individualized planning sessions, inter-visitations, co-teaching and data analysis. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Grade level team collaboration ● In-house and off-site inter-visitations ● Literacy and Mathematics Coaches instructional support ● Literacy, Mathematics, Bilingual Specialists (Generation Ready Teaching Matters, Reading Rescue, NYCDOE) ● Lead teachers support 2018-19 CEP 44  ● Differentiated Professional Development based on ADVANCE walkthroughs ● Targeted Professional Development based on choice(ESL, Bilingual, SWD, paraprofessionals) ● Staff members (teachers and paraprofessionals) are encouraged to advocate for their professional development, by being reflective and vocal about their professional needs. We surveyed teachers to establish areas in which they desire additional professional development, in conjunction to the year-long professional development workshops and institutes offered. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Students from preschool are registered based on parent choice for Kindergarten. Parents are supported through the registration process by the pupil accounting secretary, the ESL teacher, the I.E.P teacher and the parent coordinator. In addition our school offers tours and an Open House for parents and students who are transitioning into the elementary school. The current pre-k curriculum (Explore) is aligned with the common core curriculum and teachers from grades PK-2 work together to overview completed curriculum units, review student work samples, analyze data and assist in making adjustments to curriculum units as needed. • Kindergarten orientation provided for parents of incoming Kindergarten children. • Screening of incoming Kindergarten students for more heterogeneous grouping. • The sharing of records between Pre- Kindergarten and Kindergarten teachers. • Articulation between Pre- Kindergarten and Kindergarten teachers. 2018-19 CEP 45  • Meetings with Turning Five Team • •Pre-K teachers participates in early childhood professional development 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Decision making and review of multiple assessment measures are embedded in weekly professional learning sessions. Teachers participated on the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) Selection Team to determine assessments which would be utilized for the 2018-2019 school year. Additionally, teachers have an opportunity to participate in designing internal school assessments such as Performance Based Assessments (PBA) and end-of-unit assessments as well as class assignments and tasks which assess students’ performance and achievement. Teachers participate in weekly grade meetings and teacher team meetings where they review student work generated by students on their respective grades. They engage in data analysis to determine strengths and weakness as well as the adjustments deemed necessary to the instructional units. Decision making and review of multiple assessment measures are embedded in weekly professional learning sessions. Funds are set aside to provide sub coverage and per session for professional development for teachers and support staff in all grades. The school’s Administrative Team meets with grade teams to analyze and monitor academic progress of identified students and provide feedback detailing next steps in instruction for these students. Administrators also monitor implementation of intervention/enrichment strategies and activities for student subgroups through formal and informal observations. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal 363,674 106,846 0 X X 0 5c 5a, 5b 0 2018-19 CEP 46  Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Local 23,886 3,842,146 x X 5a,5b 5a, 5b, 5c,5d 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 47   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 48  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy P.S. 18’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. PS 18's policy is designed to engage parents in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Families Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  Parent Literacy and mathematics workshops  Social/Emotional workshops provided by school-based counselors and Montefiore Health Clinic personnel. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● P.S. 18 actively involves parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I 2018-19 CEP 49  Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact. These activities take place during School Leadership Team meetings and Parent-Association Meetings in addition to Title I meetings. ● Parent members of the Title I committee are invited to discuss and decide on how to spend the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills ● The Title I committee will ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact. ● P.S. 18 has a Parent Coordinator who serves as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator provides parent workshops, and translation support. Having a desk on the first floor in close proximity to the main entrance, enables our Parent Coordinator to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator maintains a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● Parent workshops are conducted monthly addressing topics that include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home. ● Student Proficiency Levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, School Quality Snapshot, and Learning Environment Survey Report are discussed with parents at School Leadership Team Meetings, Parent Association Meetings and at parent-teacher Conferences. ● The required Annual Title I Parent Meeting held (on or before December 1 st of each school year) advising parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Act; ● Ten Parent Association meetings are held throughout the year. Two meetings are held in the evening. There are four quarterly meeting held with the PA Executive Board. School Leadership Team Meetings are held monthly with additional meetings scheduled as needed. Meetings take place after school. Information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor are shared. Parents are encouraged to provide suggestions as to how the school community can better meet the needs of the students and parents we serve. ● All critical school documents are translated and translators are available during all meetings and events. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement P.S. 18 will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year such as Holiday and Spring Concerts, Annual Art Show, Science Fair, Family Day and Parent Trips. ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. ● A Parent Engagement Bulletin Board is set up in the Lobby and maintained by Parent Coordinator. ● Provide written progress reports that are periodically (three times a year) given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Distribute a school calendar designed to keep parents informed about school activities 2018-19 CEP 50  School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 18, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● Instruction is delivered through the Workshop Model of Instruction in all academic areas. ● Students receive instruction in the Arts (Visual Art and Music), Library /Media, and Physical Education which provides our students with a well-rounded education. ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences is embedded throughout the curriculum and incorporated into school activities. ● Curriculum in all subject areas is aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards. ● All instruction is delivered by highly qualified teachers. If and when a teacher is not highly qualified, parents will be notified as required by the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESSA). ● Data is collected monthly and analyzed quarterly and used to drive instruction. ● All special education mandates will be followed and students’ instruction driven by IEP goals. ● Academic Intervention Services (Tier I and Tier II) will be provided to students to help them meet the standards. ● English Language Learners will be serviced with a combination of push-in and Transitional Bilingual models and further supported by Title III intervention. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Parent-Teacher Conferences will be held in November 2018 and March 2019 during which time the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related. ● Report cards will be distributed three times a year, November, March and June. ● Progress Reports/Goals will be distributed three times a year. 2018-19 CEP 51  ● Annual Title I Parent Meeting was held for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved. ● To respect the rights of limited English proficient families, interpretation services are made available at all parent meetings and workshops. To the best of our ability, all notices and information sent home to parents is translated in order to ensure participation in their child’s education. ● Information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a monthly school calendar. School messenger/blast is used to send reminders to parents about upcoming important events. Messages and calendar are sent in a language that parents can understand. ● Parents are involved in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact. ● The Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact is distributed and discussed with parents each year at a Parent Association meeting. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ●Staff will has access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents during school year 2018- 2019. ● Teachers will meet with parents of at-risk students on an on-going basis. Teachers will meet with parents before school, after school, and during their preparation periods during the day during the 2018- 2019 school year. ● Parents have been notified of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member. ● Opportunities are provided for parents to participate in both school-wide and classroom activities which during the 2018-2019 school year. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Providing a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians. ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing opportunities for parents to attend workshops that address academic progress and achievement. ● Sharing best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community. ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy. 2018-19 CEP 52  ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent. ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age. ● To insure that all immunizations are up to date as well as all other health issues are addressed. ● Attend PA meetings on a regular basis. ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks and reading logs as they are assigned. ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes). ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games. ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, team sports and/or quality family time. ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child including adhering to the uniform policy. ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits(school trips, PA functions) ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education including but not limited to attending parent workshops offered by the school community. ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district and keep current information on school documents such as the Blue Cards. ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested. ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact. ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible. ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams. ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. 2018-19 CEP 53  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● making up missed assignments including class work when absent from school ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. ● always think about my future with college and career 2018-19 CEP 54  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: John Peter Zenger This school is (check one): DBN: 07X018 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 60 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 3 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 18 will conduct an ELL Institute that will focus on immigrant students who are at different levels of proficiency. This institute is based on the five essential components of reading instruction as well as math instruction, which the New York City Department of Education has woven into its Children’s First Initiative. The Children’s First Initiative provides clear opportunity for early literacy and math learning. This year’s ENL after school program will target the bottom 1/3 of our LEP students. The students will be grouped according to their grade. Services will be provided in a Title III funded after school program that will meet Wednesdays and Thursdays beginning in November and ending in April. Each session will last for two hours from 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. There will be three teachers employed for the program. The Finish Line New York ELLs (for NYSESLAT) program will be utilized during the Title III program for the per session activities. The students will also prepare for the NYSESLAT using the Finish Line New York ELA workbook. The teachers will provide the students with strategies and skills, that they will be able to apply, to further support them in literacy. The program will target all proficiency levels excluding those students in the commanding level. The students in the commanding level will be entitled to receive additional support during the ELA/ Math Institute which will be provided along side the Title III after-school program. For math instruction, the teachers will be utilizing Finish Line Mathematics for the Common Core State Standards workbooks (Spanish books will be utilized where necessary). Three teachers certified in ENL and/or Bilingual Education will instruct students during this period.. The program will provide domain-based instruction which includes a focus on academic language and vocabulary development for both reading and math; content-based instruction; differentiated instruction for literacy and math; and a daily instructional routine in oral language.The program will enrich the English proficiency of the participating students by allowing teachers to incorporate a balanced literacy program where whole language and related arts add strength to each other. It is a research based program that improves the oral language of students by integrating prior knowledge, vocabulary and other skills appropriate for LEPS to enrich their comprehension in reading so that they can become successful speakers, readers and writers. The students’ success will be measured by utilizing Learning Standards for English as a Second Language 1 and 3. In addition, the Title III Immigrant funds are utilized to purchase the Imagine Learning English Program in order to provide enhanced instructional opportunities for immigrant students. The program will provide instruction and reinforcement for the Mathematics portion of the Common Core State Standards. Finish Line’s instructional lessons are modeled using 2018-19 CEP 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information communication, connections, representation, reasoning and proof and problem solving in order to provide connections to the Common Core. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The school's professional development will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction. Staff members will receive this professional development outside the school building by ELL specialists as well as in-house by the ENL Coordinator and the Bilingual Peer Coach. Teachers also meet during common preparatory periods to plan and refine their teaching and delivery of instructional best practices. Other venues, may include teacher reflections, labsites -where activities practiced with students may be re-enacted in our school environment, on-going class inter-visitations and curriculum is differentiated for ELLs.The ENL Coordinator also attends the following workshops and turn-keys the skills and knowledge gained from the learning opportunities provided by the training sessions to the rest of the staff. These workshops have been helpful and instructional, so we will continue to prepare our ELL's staff in preparation for the writing of the LAP and administering of the NYSESLAT during the 2018-2019 school year. ● Technical support in writing the LAP● District support staff for NYSESLAT● Preparing ELLs for the ELA and NYSESLAT Assessments● Title III Technical Support● Compliance with Program Mandates for ELLs• Professional Development Institutes (UFT Teacher Center)● Office of English Language Learning (OELL)This professional development will provide teachers with specific comprehensive skills development combined with practice and application in the five key areas of reading: phonemic awareness, phonics/word study, vocabulary, comprehension and fluency and instruction and reinforcement for Mathematics using communication, connections, representation, reasoning and proof and problem solving in order to provide the connections to the Common Core. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental involvement will consist of workshops presented by Ms. Carmen Nieves, the Parent Coordinator, Ms. Mia Martinez, Community Learning School Resource Coordinator and 2018-19 CEP 57  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities representatives of Lincoln Hospital. These workshops will be conducted beginning in September and ending in June. The parents will be notified of these activities in their preferred language which is predominantly Spanish. Parents will be notified via electronic announcements, parent newsletters, with students and by mail correspondence. PS 18 will have The Translation Interpretation Unit translating these letters. Notifications will also be posted in the main office, cafeteria and dismissal exits. These workshops will be offered once a month from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. to an audience of approximately 30 of our parents and will also be in their preferred language. During these workshops the parents will be provided with refreshments and educational incentives.> Lincoln Hospital Health Fair and Parent Workshops> Nutrition Workshops> Cancer Awareness, Diabetes, Hypertension, and other health issues> Common Core Standards, Special Reform, Title I Chancellor's Regulations, Helping your child succeed in school> Professional Development on various topics related to Chancellor's Regulations> Community topics of interest, educational trips and learning activities> Fire Safety and CPR> Safety and Gang AwarenessAs a result of parents participating in these workshops, we expect to fortify their knowledge on these various topics so that they can be more equipped to participate in their children’s educative process. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 58 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 7 School Name John Peter Zenger Borough Bronx School Number 018 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lauren Sewell-Walker Coach Aricia Centeno-Sosa ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Janice Badal Teacher/Subject Area n/a Teacher/Subject Area n/a Related-Service Provider Cristina Sanchez Superintendent Richard Cintron Assistant Principal Michelle Nelson Coach Sophy Aponte School Counselor Yolanda Miller Parent Monica Flores Parent Coordinator Carmen Nieves Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 5 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 577 2018-19 CEP 60 Total number of ELLs 190 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 32.93%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1975-2017 2016-2017 K 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # 5 0 0 1 0 0 6 1 1 1 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use EDL (Evaluacion del Desarrollo de la Lectura), Writing on Demand and DRA (Running Records) to assess the early literacy of our ELLs. EDL is a Spanish assessment for bilingual classrooms used to track students' development of early literacy knowledge and skills. The assessment is designed to show educators where a child is making progress and where he or she may need further instruction. The EDL kit is based on benchmarks, or standards, that every child should meet in Kindergarten and Grades 1, 2, and 3. These benchmarks are grounded in research and reflect the current New York State literacy standards. EDL is an early emergent formal assessment that contains skills of letter name and sound recognition, word awareness, timed fluency test, and various leveled stories with retelling strategies. The Writing on Demand assessment serves as a baseline to determine the student's writing strengths and weaknesses. The DRA is a running record that is used to determine the students independent reading levels. It helps inform the teacher of the guided reading, strategy groups and the differentiated 2018-19 CEP 61  instruction depending on the need of each student. Most of our students are at the approaching level based on the benchmarks or standards based on the early literacy skills. This quantitative form of data is utilized to measure student's at, below or above grade level in reading. The quantitative data is then used for qualitative form of data to create smaller groups and student conferences to guide instructional planning for ELLs. The data obtained provides us with our ELL students' independent level on phonics, fluency and comprehension throughout the year. The data also provides us with measurable benchmarks of academic growth in literacy for our learners and guides us towards differentiated plans of instruction for different levels of reading and writing. This data drives our instructional plan based on the students' needs, and teachers are able to differentiate students' work, assessments and groupings. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The MOSL team administers the formative assessments throughout the year. There are four benchmarks for the formative assessments, September, December, March and June. The curriculum-embedded assessments are administered by the classroom teachers upon the completion of each unit. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? PS 18 evaluates the success of our programs for ELLs by utilizing informal and formal exams. Some Informal/Formal assessments are but may not be limited to; Performance Based Assessments Pre and Post (PBA), Mid-line and End-line Assessments, Quick Checks, and Reading Logs. We also can measure the success of our programs by periodically analyzing data in order to determine if we meet AYP for ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The MOSL team administers the formative assessments throughout the year. There are four benchmarks for the formative assessments, September, December, March and June. The curriculum-embedded assessments are administered by the classroom teachers upon the completion of each unit. We also provide AIS for 6 weeks per cycle for students who are at risk as a result of scoring a level 1 in ELA in grades 3-5. Furthermore, students in grades K-2 reading below grade level also receive AIS as a result of reading below grade level. RTI is provided for students who are at risk of being referred, they receive 3 tiers prior to referral. Fountas and Pinnel LLI is utilized to assess and monitor students' progress. This year we also implemented the WOW Program (World of Words) which is designed to improve vocabulary and comprehension and the Reading Rescue Program which helps accelerate struggling readers' literacy skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Currently, at PS 18X we use the following assessments, Evaluacion del Desarrollo de la Lectura (EDL), and DRA running records to gather data to help us guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RTI) framework. Once all of the data is collected, we then analyze it to determine what tier the students fall under and group them accordingly. Tier 1 instruction is provided by the classroom teacher, Tier 2 is provided by the RTI teacher (3X a week for 30 minutes) as a pull-out program and Tier 3 is also provided by the RTI teacher (5X a week for 30 minutes) as a pull-out program. Depending on the Tier the students are in, we then know what strategies and or programs we can implement based on the student's individual needs. Some of the strategies and or programs used are Reading A-Z.com, sight word recognition, comprehension strategies and decoding. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The Bilingual Instructional Team analyzes student data and the patterns across proficiencies and grades. P.S. 18X has 190 students that were given the NYSESLAT or the Language Assessment Battery Test Revised(LAB-R). In Kindergarten, there were 13 entering, 2 emerging, 3 transitioning and 12 expanding students totaling 30. First grade had 10 entering, 6 emerging, 5 transitioning and 11 expanding students totaling 32. Second grade had 7 entering, 16 emerging, 22 transitioning and 6 expanding students totaling 51. In third grade we had 3 entering, 4 emerging, 6 transitioning and 10 expanding students totaling 23. Fourth grade had 4 entering, 2 emerging, 11 transitioning and 8 expanding students totaling 25 and in the fifth grade we had 9 entering, 7 emerging, 4 transitioning and 9 expanding students totaling 29. Of the 190 students that took the 2018-19 CEP 62  NYSESLAT or the LAB-R, there were 46 students in total at the entering stage, 37 at the emerging stage, 51 at the transitioning stage and 56 at the expanding stage. Based on the data provided by the graph, we can conclude that most of our students given the NYSESLAT or the LAB-R are at the expanding level of proficiency. The Bilingual Instructional Team analyzes student data and the patterns across proficiencies and grades. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In Early September teachers receive NYSESLAT student data. Teachers utilize this data in order to analyze, plan accordingly and assess students according to their level. Furthermore, for the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will receive professional development to enhance teacher plans by ensuring they create centers by utilizing ENGAGE NY as a model in creating activities according to students' language acquisition. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELLs receive stand alone ENL and integrated ENL through a push-in or pull-out program. In Stand-alone ENL, students receive English Language Development by a New York State certified ESOL teacher in order to acquire the English Language needed for success in core content areas. Integrated ENL is when students receive core content area (English Language Arts, Math, Science, or Social Studies) and English language development instruction which includes home language supports and appropriate ELL scaffolds carried out by a combination of ESOL and content certified teachers or dually certified teachers. Students are grouped by grade, DRA levels and by their levels on the NYSESLAT (to ensure that the students receive their mandated minutes as per CR Part 154.2). b. TBE program. If applicable. P.S. 18 offers the Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) model for Spanish speaking ELL students and English New Language (ENL) services to ELL students of other ethnic origins. The TBE model incorporates the student's native language and culture to allow students a successful transition to English in a bilingual classroom setting. Teachers in TBE program use data from NYSESLAT and informal student assessments in order to group students according to their English acquisition level. In Stand-alone ENL, students receive English Language Development by a New York State certified TESOL teacher to acquire the English Language needed for success in core content areas. Integrated ENL is when students receive core content area (English Language Arts, Math, Science, or Social Studies) and English language development instruction which includes home language supports and appropriate ELL scaffolds carried out by a combination of TESOL and content certified teachers or dually certified teachers. Students are grouped by grade, DRA levels and by their levels on the NYSESLAT (to ensure that the students receive their mandated minutes as per CR Part 154.2). Home Language Arts is implemented through the content areas, Math, Science and Social Studies. c. DL program. If applicable. ELLs in the freestanding ENL program receive stand alone ENL and integrated ENL through a push-in program by a certified TESOL teacher a certified elementary school teacher. Students are grouped by grade and by their levels on the NYSESLAT. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 CEP 63  Students are grouped according to their English acquisition level, data derived from NYSESLAT scores. Entering and emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction. Transitioning and expanding students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction and commanding students receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our TBE program Math, Social Studies and Science are instructed in the native language. Math is taught through a workshop model. Science instruction is delivered through hands on experiments and recording logs using FOSS kits. Social Studies curriculum is derived from various units of study ranging from grade to grade, that are aligned to the NYS Scope and Sequence. In our ENL pull-out program, the content areas are taught in English using sheltered instruction for second language learners. In the push-in freestanding and dual language ENL models, the content area of science is taught in English. Throughout the content areas, teacher lessons are aligned with the six different types of scaffolds. This structure facilitates the interaction needed to help every student participate by enriching their language development 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that ELLS are appropriately evaluated in their native language, the EDL and the HLA is administered. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our SIFE students are serviced by the classroom teacher in specific homogeneous strategy groups, RAZ kids and I-Ready (software program) is scheduled daily for individual work. Fundations (researched based phonological program) is used during the word study block and student partnerships are formed with dominant English speakers. Native language arts is the language of instruction in content areas of Math, Science and Social Studies. SIFE students will receive ENL as per CR Part 154 push-in services by the ENL teacher during the school day. In addition, SIFE students will have Native language instruction from their bilingual classroom teacher in content areas, such as Math, Science and Social Studies.Moreover, SIFE students with the home language of Spanish and are in the TBE program will receive native language instruction;the percentage of native language instruction will be based on their Lab-R or NYSESLAT scores. For students in the ENL program, native language support will be provided if needed and as available. Furthermore, SIFE students will have Native language arts instruction from their bilingual classroom teacher in content areas, such as Math, Science and Social Studies. We provide the students with instruction to ensure that their needs for basic social language, academic language and grade appropriate content is fulfilled. Newcomers are serviced by the classroom teacher in specific strategy groups and student partnerships with dominant English speakers. In addition, an Academic Intervention Teacher is provided for new comers for a period of 6 weeks per cycle. Guided Reading and Fountas and Pinell is used to monitor the progress of newcomers. The teacher also implements the WOW Program (World of Words) which is designed to improve vocabulary and comprehension and the Reading Rescue Program which helps accelerate struggling readers' literacy skills. We provide students with these programs because we want to ensure that their need for BICS (basic interpersonal communicative skills) and CALP (cognitive academic language proficiency) and grade appropriate content is fulfilled. ELLs in our school with less than three years receive additional support and instruction through the Scaffold Instruction and Language Conventions focus from the Ready-Gen program to prepare students for ELA content. The units of study specifically consists of skills pertaining to the NYS ELA test.Our data indicates that the area of need for developing students is reading and writing. These students are placed in strategy groups based on reading levels and running record results, student and teacher conferencing anecdotes, and writing baseline assessments. In the event that our schools has long term ELLs they will be provided with close monitoring of small group instruction and the "Imagine Learning English" program, which serves as an individualized computer based program geared towards specific ELL instruction. Our long-term ELLs are also coupled with proficient speakers of English. Parental involvement is also a support used for our students, we include families as participants in school decisions, and parents are viewed as advocates for our 2018-19 CEP 64  children through PTA, CEC, and other parent organizations.ELLs with special needs are serviced with an ENL push-in provider. Our ELLs with special needs receive SETSS and are serviced by a special education classroom teacher with strategy grouping for additional ELL support. Services are provided to address specific areas of need as per their IEP. Former ELLs will be provided with close monitoring of small group instruction for two years after testing proficient. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The teachers of ELLS-SWDs provide the students with graphic organizers and vocabulary that is at their individual grade level so that the students have access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. Performance indicators for each modality according to the student's Language Progressions demonstrates how students at each of the five levels can meet the Common Core standard for their grade level, using grade level text, with appropriate supports. Performance indicators have embedded teacher scaffolds to demonstrate how students can meet the indicators using grade level content and text. Performance indicators address each of the four modalities of language (L: Listening, R: Reading, S: Speaking, W: Write). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All the providers meet together to strategically implement the diverse ELLS-SWDs needs within the least restrictive environment. ENL teachers push in to support ELL-SWD students by providing them with embedded scaffolds and strategies linked to their IEP goals while taking into account their language proficiency levels. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Some targeted intervention programs that are in place to support ELA are AIS (ELA/MATH), RTI , Fundations, RAZ kids, I-Ready and Reading Rescue. The list range of intervention services are as follows: Tier 1 (In classroom), ELA/Math AIS, RTI (Tier 1, Tier 2, Tier 3). Language of service is determined by the students' academic language proficiency. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, our TBE programs are implementing the co-teaching model and the Ready-GEN curriculum. We will modify the ReadyGen curriculum to support our ELLs and promote success among all different levels of learners. In our Dual Language classes we will be implementing the Mondo Program. This program has engaging materials for classrooms. These resources are built on the Common Core that allow teachers to concentrate their time on effective instruction that meets the needs of their students. The aim has always been to provide teachers with strong support that is flexible enough to meet their unique context, and to provide students with authentic and engaging books they want to read. It helps students access to the real world of information and the imaginative world of literature, and to empower them with the ability to comprehend, communicate, and contribute to their word. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not have any programs or services for ELLS that will be discontinued this school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are offered a variety of after school academic programs, such as Title III Immigrant Programs and Dream. The Title III programs provide enhanced instructional opportunities for our ELLs as well as our non-ELL students. The Dream after-school program also invites ELLs and non ELLs to participate in their program which offers students homework support during a part of the after school session, instructional support through the content areas and fine arts as well as sports. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following instructional materials are utilized to support ELLS: Ready Gen with teacher scaffold, On Our Way To English by ENL Teachers, Engage NY, We Teach NYC (NYCIPL) for Social Studies and GO MATH English/Spanish. RAZ kids, EPIC for 2018-19 CEP 65  Educators and I-Ready which are computerized programs that help teach, assess and monitor individually various levels of growth in the second language both in school and at home. Bilingual classrooms are equipped with resources in the content area to support student's native language such as smart boards, headphones and document cameras. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our TBE program Math, Social Studies, and Science are instructed in the native language. Math is taught through the workshop model. Science instruction is delivered through hands on experiments and recording logs using FOSS kits. Social Studies curriculum is derived from various units of study ranging from grades and guided by state's scope and sequence. In our ENL classes, students use additional support resources such as, Pictonaris, native language/English dictionaries, native language books/ textbooks and translations from the Imagine Learning English program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs have support services based on their grade and are grouped by NYSESLAT or Lab-R levels; such as, entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding. There are several resources that we use to service our ELLs, such as, an ENL push-in program, the Scaffold Instruction part of Ready-GEN and the Imagine Learning English program, a computer based program in which students are following specific activities based on age appropriate material. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? PS 18X does not share the building with other schools. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students will participate in a parent/student orientation that will consist of a guided tour of the building. The parents and students will become familiar with their surroundings and will learn about all the activities that take place at PS 18X. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently we do not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently the side-by-side model is used in the Dual Language program. We have one classroom where all instruction is in English and another classroom where instruction is in Spanish. As a result both languages are taught simultaneously. The students receive a full day of instruction in English and the following day a full day of instruction in Spanish. Fifty percent of the students are English Proficient and the other fifty percent are ELLs. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 66  Teachers attend ENL professional development workshops outside of the school building where they are exposed to different strategies and methodologies to implement during the Reading and Writing Workshops. The bilingual teachers meet once a week for a 45 minute period with the Bilingual Peer Coach to discuss and turnkey pertinent information. Teachers also conduct inter-visitations and view model lessons conducted by the Bilingual Peer Coach, Aricia Centeno-Sosa for additional support to ELLS. In addition to attending professional development workshops outside of the school building, teachers will receive additional in-house professional development by the Bilingual Peer Coach, to enhance, modify and support teacher plans by ensuring they create centers by utilizing ENGAGE NY as a model in creating activities according to students' language acquisition. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Upper elementary grade students transitioning from our elementary to middle school are offered middle school information and presentations. Teachers and students are guided by the middle school liaison, counselors, and supervisors around the middle school application procedures.PS 18X provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that addresses the needs of ELLs. All teachers will receive a minimum of fifteen percent of professional development hours dedicated to language acquisition focusing on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent of professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction. Staff members will receive this professional development outside the school building by ELL specialists as well as in-house by the ENL Coordinator and the Bilingual Peer Coach. Teachers also meet during common preparatory periods to plan and refine their teaching and delivery of instructional best practices. Other venues, may include teacher reflections, labsites -where activities practiced with students may be re-enacted in our school environment, on-going class inter-visitations and curriculum is differentiated for ELLs. Annual conferences are also offered. Additionally, teachers are offered summer institutes, study groups, and educational opportunities to be professionally developed. Agendas and sign-in sheets are kept on file as a way of maintaining record of the professional development being provided. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers will meet individually with the parents of English language learners on Tuesdays during the parent engagement sessions in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings. In addition, the Dual Language Team conducts monthly parent workshops in order to provide parents with strategies they can use to increase and enhance the students' language proficiency levels at home. During these meetings and workshops teachers and the Dual Language Team provide parents with continuous support on ways to assist their child's language proficiency level. These meetings will allow for parents to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Records of the meetings/workshops stated above are kept by the facilitator in the form of agendas and sign-in-sheets. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent coordinator offers a variety of information, outreach services and support for our parents and ELL parents 2018-19 CEP 67  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lauren Sewell-Walker, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: John Peter Zenger School DBN: 07X018 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Lauren Sewell-Walker Principal Michelle Nelson Assistant Principal Carmen Nieves Parent Coordinator Janice Badal ENL/Bilingual Teacher Aricia Centeno-Sosa Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 06/28/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X018 School Name: John Peter Zenger Superintendent: Richard Cintron The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Janice) Badal ENL Coordinator Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school uses the home language survey forms distributed during registration, ATS reports as well as emergency contact cards to gather the data necessary to assess PS 18’s written translation and oral interpretation needs. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic 12 1.73 12 1.73 2018-19 CEP 71  Spanish English Soninke 253 412 10 36.56 59.54 1.45 256 410 9 36.99 59.25 1.3 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish and English represents at least 10% population of our school. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Newsletter Letters from Principal Event Letters IEPS September-June September-June September-June September-June School Staff Principal School Staff IEP Teacher 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences November/March Parent Engagement Tuesdays September-June IEP Meetings September-June Any school event involving families September-June interpretation service(s)? In-person interpretation school staff In-person interpretation school staff/Over-the-phone interpretation In-person interpretation school staff/Over-the-phone interpretation In-person interpretation school staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 72  In the event of a school emergency, limited English-proficient families are informed via notifications, letters, over-the-phone interpretation, in-person interpretation school staff and message phone blast. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The LAC will ensure that all staff members are aware of how to use the translation services and the over-the-phone interpretation service via the T&I brochure and staff meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All school letters and notifications are translated into Spanish which is the language the majority of our parents speak. We also provide translated documents in low incident languages, such as Arabic. These translated documents are retrieved from the DOE website or through in-house translations. Furthermore, parents that need additional assistance are contacted by telephone and support is provided based on their individual needs Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The attendance count from the surveys and meetings will be utilized to gather feedback from the parents on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 CEP 73 
