2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X020 School Name: P.S. 20 P.O.GEORGE J. WERDAN III Principal: CARLA LING 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/MS 20 N/A School Number (DBN): 10X020 ELEMENTARY/MIDDLE – PRE K - 8 3050 WEBSTER AVENUE, BRONX, NY 10467 718-515-9370 Phone Number: 718-515-9378 Fax: Dr. Carla Ling cling2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Dr. Carla Ling Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: RICHARD GARTNER ROSALINA GARCIA Carol Penna Dorothy Pena N/A N/A MaritzaHernandez District Information Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: MARIBEL HULLA Superintendent: ONEFORDHAM PLAZA, BRONX, NY 10458, Room 836 MHULLA@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  BRONX FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: JOSE RUIZ Executive Director: 1230 ZEREGA AVENUE, BX, NY 10462 / ONEFORDHAM PLAZA, BX, NY 10458 JRUIZ2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718—741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) DR. CARLA LING RICHARD GARTNER ROSALINA GARCIA ALKEEN HALL DOROTHY PENA CAROLPENNA ALISON PLATI SHARONREIFER JOHANNY LOPEZ *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) LINDA VALDES MAHFUJAKHATUN SUMONASHIMU SHAHNAZISLAM JHEYDEEPEREZ FOILAMONTESDE OCA Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS/MS 20 is dedicated to striving for excellence for all students. Through our balanced partnership of teachers, staff, students, parents and the community, all students are guided to take responsibility for their own learning. We believe that a supportive, risk-free learning environment supports students in their pursuit of lifelong academic and personal achievement. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/MS 20, P.O. George J. Werdann, III School is located in the Bronx County, in District 10. The school is home to over 1,000 students from grade Pre-K to 8th grade. The school is nestled between Mosholu Parkway North and Bainbridge Avenue and bordered by Metro North. PS/MS 20 shares the building with a District 75 school. As of the 2010 census, the population of the surrounding area is categorized as an upscale urban community that is densely populated and racially diverse. Ethnicity Hispanic Black White Asian Other 10467 Demographics 48% 33% 10% 6% 3% PS/MS20 Demographics 72% 9% 7% 10% 2% The school has strategically partnered with consultants and organizations to support our school culture - embracing the Positive Behavior Implementation System, to promote the social-emotional and intellectual progress of all of our students. PS/MS 20 partnerships and collaborations include:  Teacher's College Reading Writing Project [TCRWP]: is committed to structuring the tools and methods for teaching reading, writing and inquiry, so that students have time to write. Students work as professional authors do, cycling through the stages of the writing process and receiving feedback that is essential to their growth as writers; their writing becomes a tool for learning across the curriculum.  New York City Mathematics Project [NYCMP]: The programs experiment with active, inquiry-based approaches to math and believe these approaches contribute to students' success in school, college, the community, and the workplace.  The Middle School Quality Initiative [MSQI]- The MSQI 5 pillars of literacy framework is based on the Reading  Next Research, which describes both the instructional and structural necessities for the improvement of adolescent literacy. This partnership supports our instructional focus. IXL Learning: Educational Technology offering unlimited practice of math skills. IXL's Continuous Diagnostic gathers information on the student's progress in order to personalize the students’ learning. The program monitors activity and growth and recommends skills that will challenge the students at the right level. It helps each student grow as they become active learners. The program helps the students understand what they can do to improve, to discover and reach their potential. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  MyON: A personalized online literacy environment that affords students the ability to choose books by interest and reading level. The platform monitors student activity and growth. Targeted groups for this program are ENL and SWD students. School's Out NYC [SONYC]: An after-school program that serves as a pathway to success for MS students, grades 6-8. Structured like clubs, the model offers young people a choice in how they spend their time. SONYC provides rigorous instruction in sports, STEM, and the arts; it emphasizes youth leadership through service.  Comprehensive After-School System [COMPASS ]: This program provides opportunities for K-5 students to  explore their interests and creativity in an environment that supports social and emotional learning. Activities include sports, drama, music, STEM, and trips throughout the City.  CHAMPS: The Middle School Sports and Fitness League promotes physical activity for students in grades 6-8. Throughout the school year, students participate in soccer, volleyball, and basketball programs.  Boy Scouts of America: A youth development organization for young people that builds character, trains them in the responsibilities of good citizenship, and develops personal fitness.  America Reads & Counts Challenge: PS/MS 20 has developed a close relationship with Fordham University. This Higher Education Institution sends tutors to our school to support teachers and students in Kindergarten through 6th Grade. The purpose of the program is to improve students’ achievement in literacy and mathematics. Teachers work with tutors, assigning them academic tasks which may include working one-on-one with a student or a small group of students. Tutors always work under the direction and supervision of teachers to reinforce targeted learning goals. Student Council: Students have leadership and volunteer opportunities available to them through participation in school government. Councils are open to both elementary and middle school students.   Astor Services for Children and Families: The program will work with the school one day a week for half a day. The program will provide intervention services to 20-30 students, in six week cycles.. The program utilizes a licensed clinician, a behavioral specialist, and a parent advocate. The team works with the school community providing professional development focusing on intervention skills and strategies for servicing our children. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school currently has 300 English Language Learners (as native language students), 27% of the school population. The school-wide results of the 2017 NYSESLAT state tests are 52% for listening, 77% for speaking, 50% for reading, and 49% for writing. The need for the school is to increase the level of each modality to above 70% for each category. The school has 300 Students with Learning Disabilities, 27% of the student population. The SWDs struggle with reading complex text and writing responses that are evidence-based. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year, PS/MS 20’s lower-grades teachers worked with the Universal Literacy [ULIT] coach to improve their pedagogical practice in reading. The teachers planned inter-active read alouds together and supported each other through weekly inter-visitations. In the upper grades, the teachers shared their learning from professional learning cycles, within the grades and across the grades, and from outside professional development. The teachers use Reciprocal Teaching to support students' academic discussions and small group work. While working with the math consultants and the BFSC the teachers built their mathematical confidence by implementing the math workshop model and The 5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Math Discussions. Two groups of teachers participated in the workshops. The first set of teachers participated in two professional learning cycles; the part one sessions of the 5 Practices was for the learning process and implementation. The same group of 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  teachers continued their learning in part two of the professional learning cycle, as a study group for grades 5-8. The continuation of each group of teachers allowed the teachers to co-plan across grades 4-8. Two other teachers participated in a professionals learning cycles for FRACTIONS and mathematical routines. Through the teacher’s participation and process of turn-keying to colleagues, the fourth-grade teachers can now assess where to begin the work on fractions from the beginning of the year and how the lower grades can start the work. The teachers worked over the year to incorporate Reciprocal Teaching [RT]into their instructions for grades 3-8 in the four core subject areas of ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies. The school community engaged in reciprocal teaching in the beginning of the school year with school-wide professional learning cycles in grades 3-8, that included the teachers and students. Throughout the year, the consultants working within the school, as well as the district innovation grant have supported the teachers with RT protocols of predicting, clarifying, questioning and summarizing. The students are clarifying their understanding of new words and answering questions by using the evidence from the text. The students are working on creating a stronger summary of text by circling important words and underlining important information to support a written summary of the text. Teachers are ending the year by supporting the students with developing higher-level questions by using question stems based on Depth-of-Knowledge [DoK] for levels 2-3. The school will focus on developing formative assessments based on students’ running records for reading level assessments, conference notes, and through student conversations. The running records will help the teachers identify patterns in students’ reading behaviors. The teachers will use the reading behaviors as a diagnostic tool for developing ongoing, small guided reading sessions that support students’ reading comprehension, through word and text study. This will allow each student to develop positive reading behaviors as they move from an instructional level to an independent level at each reading milestone. The conferences will focus on student conversations regarding the purpose of reading, before, during and after reading and will assess how the student is interacting with the text and how they are progressing. The conferences will help the teacher determine what the student needs and how to plan for further instruction. Teachers will participate in collaborative teaching to plan non-evaluative classroom visitations to enhance pedagogy, instructional knowledge and focus on the collaborative development of instructional knowledge. The focus of collaborative teaching is for the teachers to learn from each other through observations and reflection on teaching practices. Each grade team will plan a reading lesson and a math lesson based on data and goals set forth for the students; they will teach the lesson and allow others to observe, then engage in a post-lesson discussion focused on developing teachers’ ideas and experiences of different approaches to teaching. The teachers will also participate in reciprocal teaching for mathematics, to develop a deeper understanding of the content and student learning. The teachers will use these practices to support student learning for performance-based tasks and will use a holistic rubric to assess the students’ portfolio work which will demonstrate rigorous learning and growth. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. Grade K-8 will use a 90-minute literacy block format with the main focus on the TC writing units. The teachers will use interactive read and shared reading to teach students a skill or concept, for the students to practice during independent reading. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X020 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1072 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 139 137 37 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 61 36 49 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 91.1% % Reduced Lunch 24.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.0% 72.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.25 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 29.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 70% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YSH NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 133 133 91.1% 2.9% 24.5% 10.9% 9.2% 2.1% 6 5% 7.3 24.2% 58% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YES NO N/A NO NO NO YSH N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The lower-grades teachers are working with the ULIT coach to improve their pedagogical practice in reading. The teachers are planning inter-active read alouds together. The teachers are supporting each other through weekly inter-visitations. In the upper grades, the teachers are sharing their learning from professional learning cycles and outside professional development; within the grades and across the grades. The teachers are using the information to support student academic discussions and small group work. For the 2018-2019 school year, the teachers in all grades will focus on one curriculum for reading and writing. To prepare for the implementation of the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project the teachers in grades K-2 practiced providing reading instruction through interactive reading/writing and guided instruction in small group work. The teachers in grades 3-8 used reciprocal teaching strategies in reading and writing to prepare for the TC units of study. At the end of the 2018 school year, all of the literacy teachers in grades K-8 launched the first TC writing units of study as preparation for the following school year. In 2017-2018 the teachers supported the students reading development, by analyzing the students’ reading ability with Fountas and Pinnell [F&P]running records. In grades 6-8, the teachers analyzed the students reading ability with the Degree of Reading Power. Based on the students’ F&P reading level and the DRP Lexile level the teachers assigned the appropriate literature book to the students. At the end of the school year, the data trend found that the 1/3 of the students in K-8 were reading below benchmark levels. The plan of action for the 2018-2019 school year is to have ½ or more students continuously moving along the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  reading continuum to grade level in grades K-8. To address the students reading level all teachers will use F&P to assess the students’ reading level. All teachers, including the ENL teachers in grades K-5, will continue to study how to properly assess the students reading level with an emphasis on analyzing the miscue analysis to determine the reading behaviors students need to develop and move along the reading continuum to the next reading level. In grades 6-8 the literacy and the ENL teachers will study how to assess students reading level with F&P. To support the students’ reading development, teachers in grades, K- 3, will focus on reading to the students, three times a day through read alouds, shared reading, and interactive reading in their reading, social studies, science or math blocks. The teachers with SWD and ENL students will begin the year with reading and writing units from the previous year from the TC reading and writing units of study. The purpose of starting with a previous grade’s unit of study is to acclimate the students to the new reading and writing program. All teachers that support the SWDs and the ENL students will use the TC small group reading and writing strategies to support the students learning, from the classroom, and as an aid to support the students as readers and writers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, all literacy teachers will implement the TC reading and writing curriculum with fidelity, resulting in students improving their reading and writing and at least 3% of students advancing 5 % benchmark from pre to post assessments with each unit through the support of clear and guided instruction by teachers and support staff. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher teams will:  Teachers in grades 3-8 will continue to deepen their knowledge of the implementation of Reciprocal Teaching to improve student student discussion while supporting the students to carefully craft questions around text and problem solving strategies. 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Lead Teachers, Teachers, ENL/Speech Teachers, and SETSS Teacher All Teachers including Special Ed, ENL, and Speech teachers  All teachers, including the Special Education, SETSS, Speech, All Students and the ENL teachers will be provided with professional learning cycles to implement the TC reading and writing units of study. Implement TC Unit Reading and Writing with fidelity through teacher team planning.  ENL Students  Use F&P to analyze the students’ reading levels to plan appropriately for the students instructional reading levels. SWD Students  Develop formative assessments to monitor student mastery of standards and analyze data to make adjustments in curricula and unit and lesson plans for reading.  Use the TC writing rubric to assess student work, to create a   student portfolio for writing. Support students in self-assessment of their reading behaviors, to develop the student as a reader. Support students in self-assessment with the TC writing checklist to improve their writing skills from the on demand writing piece to the published writing piece.  Purchase research-based writing program (TCRWP) to Admin, 9/18-6/19 increase student reading and writing performance.  Train teachers to implement progress monitoring during the lesson. Classroom Teachers for GE and SWD ENL Teachers Administrators, TC Coach, Lead Teachers, Teachers, ENL/Speech Teachers, and SETSS Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  SETSS Teacher Speech Teachers Provide many opportunities for students to take responsibility for their own learning: Admin, 9/18-6/19  Student self-assessment using rigorous, standards-based rubrics  Peer assessment   Student-to-student discussions and support Student presentations with detailed explanations of their own work. Students, Teachers Administrators, TC Coach,Lead Teachers, Teachers, Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Share with families the curriculum expectations for students during parent-teacher conferences and parent meetings. Reach out to parents through contact with the Parent Coordinator and connection to the School Leadership team (SLT). The parents will be informed of the curriculum expectations and goals through family letters and access resources, detailing how to develop their students as readers and writers. Share #TCRWP, a social connection centered on discussion on how schools can help families understand the principles of Units of Study and the foundations of workshop instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Use data-cycles to monitor major standards to support progress monitoring  Programming for RTI period for ELA and Math within the 90 minute block of ELA and Math  Universal Literacy Coach provides professional development for teachers in grade K-2  Monday PLCs organized for looking at student work in Performance Assessments in ELA and Math  Common Planning to assess and plan for small group work reading skills based on F&P results  TC coach for K-2, 3-5, and 6-8 grade bands Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June of 2019, all literacy teachers will implement the TC reading and writing curriculum with fidelity, resulting in students improving their reading and writing and at least 2% of students advancing 3% benchmark from pre to post assessments with each unit through the support of clear and guided instruction by teachers and support staff. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measurement is the TC student and teacher writing rubric which assesses the students' writing pieces from the on demand to the published writing piece. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? This response should be updated to include student subgroups for which your school has been identified for improvement. Cite relevant and current data from the School Quality Guide and Quality Review (QR). The Ramapo for Children coaches had previously provided one-on-one coaching to two-three teachers on each grade. Through ongoing observations, of the teachers by the team, we are now following up with teachers on next steps and analyzing other dynamics that have created barriers to student learning. Continual follow through has provided the teachers with the confidence to continue to manage behavioral expectations. In two of the three teachers in each grade, teachers have gained the confidence to decrease behaviors that have created a barrier to learning. In the upper grades, teachers are partnering to work to build behavioral expectations for groups of students across the core subjects. The teachers in the upper grades are opening the door to learn from each other to incorporate those same strategies into their teaching practice - to create learning independence. The Social-Emotional Learning Committee presented the school motto - Respect Yourself, Respect Others, and Respect the Environment. The committee worked with Ramapo for Children in creating classroom environments that supported success through relationship building and role modeling. Role Modeling was key to demonstrating community values and expectations and consisted of modeling the expectations of our community and following set rules. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Establishing Structures and Routines - by using visuals and non-verbal cues to communicate instructions and information. The staff worked on creating visuals by posting schedules, reminders, and providing students with step-by-step instructions. The use of non-verbal cues is used to quiet students and to refocus their attention. Teachers also worked on anticipating the problems students might encounter by analyzing which parts of the day are challenging for the student(s), identifying and anticipating triggers for problematic behavior, and managing the triggers, not the behavior. The teachers worked on the engagement of students during instruction to reduce downtime. Over-plan and keep activities on hand for unexpected changes. Clarifying Expectations - was used to break down expectations into specific core behaviors by providing students with feedback on what to stop, start, or continue, which also included being specific about what the desired behaviors looked like and sounded like. We will continue our work this year to ensure that all members of the school community are making constructive choices regarding personal behaviors and social interactions, to ensure students are learning in a safe, risk-free learning environment. As a staff, we will continue to evaluate the needs of the school environment and plan professional learning cycles needed to establish a culture of learning. By working with all community members, we will create classrooms where students and teachers communicate clearly and listen to each other. We model for the students how to cooperate with others, resist inappropriate behaviors, negotiate conflict constructively, and seek and offer help when needed. As a school, we will continue to gather data on the social well-being of the students to support the school motto, by focusing on the expected student behavior in the classrooms, cafeteria, hallways and the lunchroom/recess areas. The Administrative team, the Dean, and the Social Workers will present the expectations to the students. The Parent Coordinator will present the expectations to the parent association at PA meetings, as they support the school community in setting up the expectations of the school policy. The team is working on incentivizing positive behavior in the lower grades by using Class Dojo. As a whole class, students will be inclined to reach a certain number of points; points will earn for them, breaks from work, trips, rewards, etc. Also, the team is working on how to instruct students in problem-solving and improved social skills by scheduling morning meetings where students have the opportunity to celebrate, debrief, and relax. Next year as additional support, the guidance counselor and the social workers will assist during a lunch period every day to support the students in peer-mediation and to develop positive behaviors to replace negative behaviors. Also, the social workers will support the classroom teachers through read alouds with the focus and discussion on how to react positively to challenging situations, as the first mode of operation. The School Dean, guidance counselor, and the social workers will work with students that are having difficulty with regulating their behavior, so as to decrease the disciplinary actions from level 4 and 5 incidents that lead to principal and superintendent suspensions; this is done with a check-in and check-out system; this system will give students the opportunity to assess their daily behavior to improve their time on task, both in the classroom during the lesson and during independent or group work. The school will work with ASTOR Services for Students and Families to support our twenty to thirty at-risk students to decrease the level 4 and 5 incidents that lead to principal and superintendent suspensions. The clinician will work with students one day per week. The behavior specialist will work with teachers to use social-emotional learning/culturally responsive teaching to support students to become independent learners by acknowledging the triggers that impede student learning; they will work with the students on replacement behaviors that will support their learning. The family advocate will work with the families to support their children with their social-emotional learning and foster growth as a student and a member of the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administrative and the auxiliary staff will implement social and emotional learning supports for teachers and students, resulting in a 10% growth in positive responses in classroom behavior on the annual School Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators, Dean, Social Workers, and Guidance Counselor, Teachers. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). PS/MS 20 will continue to develop the Social Emotional Learning [SEL] accountability system through Class Dojo: Admin 9/18-6/19 Teachers Students  Acknowledge and reinforce respectful, safe and responsible behaviors for individual and class achievement for expected behavioral criteria (charts, graphs that are publicly displayed 3x per year)  Provide assemblies to expose students to school goals, embracing of tolerance, bullying, and role-playing on how to deal with challenging situations  Provide students with strategies through instruction and support, that lead to the academic behaviors of effective students  Provide on-going Professional Development and training based on supports previously provided by Ramapo for Children  Meet monthly to analyze data captured by section sheets with the expectation that progress and/or lack of progress will be shared and communicated to the faculty  Publicly display the classes that are achieving the highest number of positive points for the month. This will allow the teachers the opportunities to look at what techniques are working.  Host frequent parent workshops that support parents in Admin 9/18-6/19 employing strategies at home that can be used to promote and develop the social and emotional development in their child(ren). Supply account access to Social Emotional Learning supports, such as NYC DOE Connect with Kids Network. PC Parents Increase training opportunities for the Parent Coordinator to support stronger relationships with parents. Admin 9/18-6/19   PC Administrators, Dean, Social Workers, and Guidance Counselor, Teachers and Parent Coordinator. Administrators, Dean, Social Workers, and Guidance Counselor, Teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24   The weekly data analysis meetings re: information captured by section sheets with the expectation that progress and/or lack of progress will be shared and communicated to the faculty via the Dean. Admin 9/18-6/19 Dean  Train students in peer mediation and leadership training Admin 9/18-6/19 with a focus on developing traits necessary for college and career readiness. Dean Students Administrators, Dean, Social Workers, and Guidance Counselor, Teachers. Administrators, Dean, Social Workers, and Guidance Counselor, Teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will work with the School Dean and the Administrative staff to present the school's behavior expectations at a town hall meeting. The Parent Coordinator will work with the parents to aid them in participating in professional development seminars supporting them as team mates to their children, at home, on social and emotional behaviors that will in turn support their children's continuous learning at home. The Parent Coordinator will work with the families on the academic expectations to develop their child(ren) as leaders in the school and at home, with the TC reading and writing expectations, F&P reading levels, The 5 Practices in Mathematics and with MSQI strategies that teachers in grades 6-8 will use to promote the reading of difficult text and the written response to informational writing. The Parent Coordinator will work with the administrative staff to provide interpreters and translations of materials, of the major home languages of the parents, to increase parent participation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.     SEL Training for Teachers School-wide Implementation of the SEL program Incentives for Student Programs School-wide Implementation of Class Dojo Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the administrative and the auxiliary staff will implement social and emotional learning supports for teachers and students, resulting in a 5% growth in positive responses for classroom behavior on the annual School Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Consider selecting an instrument of measure that is a leading indicator or formative assessment, which can be used during the school year to modify teaching and learning activities in order to achieve the annual goal. Teachers and students will work together to decrease level four and five infractions according to the School Referral and Safety Policy by implementing a daily Morning Meeting with the students, across all grades as an opportunity to build caring relationships with peers and teachers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. x SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Last year PS/MS 20 focused on Reciprocal Teaching as an instructional activity in which students become leaders in small group work, across the curriculum, throughout grades 3-8 . Teachers supported students in guided group discussions using four strategies: predicting, clarifying, questioning, and summarizing. Students and teachers participated in professional learning cycles on how to use the process of reciprocal teaching. Through the professional learning cycles, the teacher worked with the students to build academic discussion by using Higher Order Thinking with Depth of Knowledge question stems. The teachers used data they gathered on students’ discussions, to make adjustments and modifications to the units of study and instruction. Through this practice, the teachers worked on strengthening the core of our Instructional focus of academic discussions and small group work. The teachers used a prescribed flow of the day to implement the Workshop Model across the curriculum and content areas. In ELA classes, students were exposed to and were provided time for independent reading. The teachers used data gathered from the small group work and the monitoring of the reciprocal learning activities to discuss with other teachers, next steps for student learning. The teachers participated in inter-classroom visitation by observing each others practice and providing each other with cool/warm feedback and next steps. Grade Lead Teachers planned, coached, and provided teachers with next steps. Next year, we will incorporate Culturally Responsive teaching to support the teachers to plan lessons relevant to our students culture and background. This will allow teachers to meet our students where they are, especially for the SWD and the ENL students. Teachers will participate in collaborative teaching three times a year, so as to collectively develop math lessons that focus on differentiation for the SWD and the ENL students. Through the collaborative lesson study, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  the teachers will create a lesson and observe a teacher demonstrating the lesson. After the teachers observe the demo lesson, the teacher will tweak the lesson based on their findings.. The other teachers that are part of the collaborative lesson study will use the updates to teach the lesson to their class. The grade leaders and the Peer Collaborative Teacher will conduct math walk throughs with the math consultants to better support the teachers with planning for SWD and ENL students. The grade leaders in grade band K-2, 3-5, and 6-8 will work with math consultants to plan the performance based math tasks to provide SWD and ENL students with opportunities to work collaboratively with their classmates to practice language development of academic language and to build with their classmates, a better understanding of concepts and skills. The MSQI coach will supply in-class coaching support with the Science and the Social Studies teachers to maintain the school’s focus on reciprocal teaching in grades 3-8. The MSQI coach will provide support to the teacher teams to develop strategies to use within classes by modeling reciprocal teaching practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administrative and the auxiliary staff will implement social and emotional learning supports for teachers and students, resulting in a 10% growth in positive responses for classroom behavior on the annual School Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Develop a school-wide understanding of the purpose and characteristics of rubrics that are consistent and share the same coherence across the grades, teachers will: Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Lead Teachers Teachers, Peer Collaborator, Teachers  Engage in structured professional collaborations using an inquiry approach to develop rubrics that improved student learning  Determine what types of rubrics work best for specific assessments  Develop and norm rubrics for content specific instructional tasks  Develop rubrics for common assessments with differentiated entry for SWD and ENL students  Align rubrics to carefully crafted questions that support  access to the curriculum for all students Instruct students on how to utilize the rubrics to assess their own work products  Analyze assessment data resulting from assigned rubric  Use results from rubrics to flexibly group students  Understand assessment results are critical to understanding student instructional levels in order to plan appropriately for their engagement Teachers will attend professional development that purposefully trains on the delivery of reciprocal math * Teachers will participate in inter-classroom visitations during math * Teachers will improve their practice by collaborating with peers in situations that will allow them to immediately bring back to the classroom Teacher teams will engage in planning meetings to analyze rubric results, to identify student misconceptions and to provide learners with experiences that develop pre-requisite skills. Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Lead Teachers Teachers, Peer Collaborator, Teachers Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Lead Teachers Teachers, Peer Collaborator, and Teachers Provide mentoring to new teaches on developing effective teaching practices to support student learning New Teachers 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Lead Teachers, Peer 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Collaborator, and Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator, consultants, MSQI coaches and Grade Leaders will conduct family workshop to share the curriculum units of study and ways to support student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session for Data Team Per Session for Professional Development Team Per Session for Teacher Leaders Per Session for New Teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the administrative and the auxiliary staff will implement social and emotional learning supports for teachers and students, resulting in a 5% growth in positive responses for classroom behavior on the annual School Environment Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Grade leaders will collaboratively plan with the teachers on the grade, to support student learning, using on-going progress monitoring, using an assessment based feedback protocol to deliver feedback that is explicit, with actionable steps. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on this school year and the previous school environment survey, the administrative team focused on program coherence of the core subjects and instructional leadership to provide teachers with supportive feedback to increase pedagogical practices. The feedback will focus on SMART practices: S: The precise and incremental action (the what) and the method (the how) M: Evaluate the extent to which the next step(s) have been achieved. A: The rationale (the why) for the next step that is grounded in evidence of teacher practice and student learning in the lesson and other student learning data. R: The intended impact that will lead to greater student learning. T: Clear time-lines for achieving next steps and assessing progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  The process helped the administrative team in aligning the teaching practices across the grades and the curriculum to reflect a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn using the Danielson Framework to create a common language and consistency of practice across the classrooms. The school leaders reflected on teachers' use of a basal reader to teach reading to the students in grades K-5. The school leaders will work with the Universal Literacy Coach to begin to develop a reading protocol for the teachers to develop the reading skills of students through interactive read alouds. This was a positive approach because it has helped the students to develop foundational reading skills to support the students’ reading comprehension skills. The school leaders looked at Kindergarten students still reading at a Pre-A reading level. The school leaders worked with the reading consultant from Teaching Matters to guide teachers to reflect on the reading behaviors in which students needed support; they did this by looking at the reading continuum in the F&P reading kits. Thereafter, in one of the Kindergarten classes, 11 out of the 12 students moved out of the Pre-A reading level. The administrative cabinet will improve their level of targeted feedback in 1a, 2a, and 3c. The school leaders will collaboratively participate with teachers in TCRWP Professional Development and common planning sessions. The school leaders will work with the teachers to determine how to assess students’ progress through a process of gathering data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administrative team will engage teachers in observation, feedback, and professional development supporting culturally responsive teaching practice in Danielson 1a, 2a, & 3c, resulting in a 10% growth in the practice of teachers assessing student's progress through three data cycles. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Principal and Teachers collaboratively participate in TC PD;  The ENL teachers will participate in professional development on TC writing strategies;  Principal and Teachers collaboratively participate in Leader in Me;  All administrators will engage in PD using techniques previously taught to us through the Ramapo for Children program, to support classroom behavior strategies. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Peer Teachers Collaborative Teacher, Teacher, TC Coach, Consultants, Teacher Leaders To improve teacher practice in Domain 2, Teacher Leaders will: Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Peer  Continue to assume a wide range of roles to support school Teachers  and student success; Facilitate weekly common preps with grade level/content level teacher teams for collaboration and planning;  The ENL teachers will participate in common preps to discuss the TC reading and the writing units and plan how to continue the learning in the stand-alone programs. Collaborative Teacher, Teacher, TC Coach, Consultants, Teacher Leaders To improve teacher practice in Domain 3, Teachers will: Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Peer  Collaboratively engage in student work protocols and Teachers  conversations about coherent instruction Facilitate meetings to LASW focusing on learning targets that align with the CCLS  Use a collaborative data model to assess student learning and plan next steps.  Use the data from the RR and the writing assessments to plan with the ENL teachers on students next steps. Collaborative Teachers, Teacher Leaders, Teachers To improve teacher practice in Domain 3, the Peer Collaborative Teacher will:  Provide modeling, collaboration and feedback regarding the 3b, 3c, and 3d components of the Framework; Facilitate PD sessions on Mathematical Coherence.  Teachers Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Teacher, TC Coach, Consultants, Teacher Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Implement professional learning sessions to deepen teachers’ understanding of Domains 1 and 2 to enhance content knowledge and pedagogical skills. Utilize the ULIT coach to work with vertical teams in grades K-2 to support the implementation of literacy. Provide opportunities for Special Education teachers to attend workshops relating to ICT models of inclusion for appropriate instruction in Domain 2 and 3. Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Peer Teachers Collaborative Teacher, Teacher, TC Coach, Consultants, Teacher Leaders Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, ULIT Teachers Coach, TC Coach, Consultants Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Peer Teachers Collaborative Teacher, Teacher, Consultants, Teacher Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS20 will support parent participation in Leadership academies, encourage participation in their School Leadership Team, and turn key their involvement to the community of parents at the Parent Association meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Provide professional development that cites research driven evidence and support of structures and strategies to support student achievement. Principal Participation in NYC Leadership PD for Principal and Assistant Principals Per Session for Principal and Assistant Principals Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the administrative team will engage teachers in observation, feedback, and professional development supporting culturally responsive teaching practice in Danielson 1a, 2a, & 3c, resulting in a 5% growth in the practice of teachers assessing student's progress through three data cycles. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observing teachers' practice using the Danielson Rubric and using data gathering protocols to share findings during three data cycles; presented on Monday PD days and during grade/subject common planning sessions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their x SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school community will see more of a presence of the administrative team during arrival/dismissal and lunch/recess. During arrival, the administrative team will ensure that the students are safely entering the building on time to begin a day of learning. At dismissal, the administrative team will support the students and families by ensuring that the students leave the school in a timely fashion and safely start on their way home. During lunch and recess, the administrative team will work with the school aides to ensure the safety of students. The administrative staff will work with families to ensure active communication on student personal behaviors as a way to support the students growth both academically and socially-emotionally. At PS/MS 20 we support students in acquiring personal behaviors that develop communication and problem-solving strategies. Problem-solving strategies will be shared with families to support students in making appropriate choices that will support their education. Also, the school will create a welcoming environment for families and will take advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Embedded in our daily exchange between all stakeholders in the PS/MS 20 community, administrators, teachers, students and family members, will implement a school-wide system of positive behavioral intervention strategies that support social, emotional and intellectual health and well-being, that is communicated to and supported by parents. Via the Social-Emotional Learning Committee, we have integrated the positive behavioral intervention strategies and supports into the daily life of students, families, and teachers of PS/MS 20. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Data trends indicate that the SWD and the ENL students are not meeting the Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP); therefore, we will develop teacher leaders who will focus on communicating instructional expectations with parents. The Parent Executive Board will attend the Family Conference Day at TC with the Parent Coordinator and view TCRWP videos to learn about the expectations of TCRWP. The TC coach and the MSQI coach will work the the Parent Coordinator to hold family workshops to introduce TCRWP and MSQI teaching strategies to families. The Parent Coordinator will work with families to register for Pupil Path to make sure they are continuously viewing their student’s progress and grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of students' families will engage in one or more workshops focused on supporting TC writing and Family Math; resulting in positive parent responses for Inclusive Leadership, on the annual school environment survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent workshops to understand data related to their child’s performance achievement. Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Arrange a more flexible time for parent meetings - morning, evening, weekends. Ensure that limited English proficient families receive translated documents and interpretation services to ensure participation in parent workshops. Teachers will use Class Dojo as unified SEL tracking system paired w/ incentives for students as a way for families to monitor student's learning and progress. Parents Admin Parents Admin Parents Admin Parents Teachers 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Teachers 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Teachers 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Teachers The school will provide parents with a TC workshop to strengthen home learning. Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, The teachers will provide parents with a Math Family night to strengthen home learning. The administrative team, parent coordinator, staff, and guest speakers will provide parent workshops throughout the year on the CCLS, college, and career readiness, high school admissions, curriculum supports, parenting, health, and other relevant topics. Parent Association will schedule monthly PA meetings during the day and also at night to accommodate a wide variety of parental scheduling needs. Use the Automated Telephone System to communicate upcoming school events and workshops to families. Backpack home fliers for curriculum night, parent conferences, workshops, etc. Parents Admin Parents Admin Parents Teachers 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Teachers 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Teachers, PA Board Admin 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Parents Admin Parents Admin Parents Teachers 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Teachers 09/18-06/19 Administrators, Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our focus will be to conduct TCRWP and MSQI parent workshops with topics that may include: understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations, literacy, accessing community and support services; as well as providing technology training to build parents’ skills and ability to help their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Translation Services: Spanish teacher will support the staff in providing translation of prepared materials for parents. Teacher fluent in Bengali, will provide interpretation support services during SLT meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, 40% of students' families will engage in one or more workshops focused on supporting TC writing and Family Math; resulting in positive parent responses for Inclusive Leadership on the annual school environment survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets for attendance at workshops Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) AIS services are determined through Universal Screening using DRP/MOSL Subject Performance Task in grades 6-8; Fountas and Pinnell in K-5 for reading, and Math Performance Task in grades K-5. Students receive reading support using MyOn. AIS services are determined through Universal Screening using MOSL Performance Task in grades K-8 and unit assessments. AIS services for Science are closely connected to reading scores Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Teachers work with students to build vocabulary, comprehension and writing skills. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day in AIS and RTI identified periods; extended and Saturday programs Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Services are delivered through within-class staffing that reduces student-teacher ratios; Teachers instruct in small group, or one-to-one The programs are designed to strengthen basic math skills with close supervision from a teacher. Students work on problem-solving strategies and how to respond to extended response questions. At-risk students in grades 4 and 8 receive extra support in understanding science concepts and strengthening science vocabulary Services are delivered through within-class staffing that reduces student-teacher ratios; Teachers instruct in small group, or One-to-one Services are delivered through within-class staffing that reduces student-teacher ratios; Teachers instruct in small group, or One-to-one During the day in AIS and RTI identified periods; extended and Saturday programs During the day in AIS and RTI identified periods; extended and Saturday programs 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Social Studies AIS services for Social Studies are closely connected to reading scores Support in understanding social studies concepts and strengthening vocabulary At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Tier 2 & 3 students demonstrate non-compliance of Positive Behavior; students who have an inability for completing tasks Strategies include social skills, anger management, workshops on interacting in groups, hyperactivity group play; peer mediation Services are delivered through within-class staffing that reduces student-teacher ratios; Teachers instruct in small group, or One-to-one Students work in small and large groups During the day in AIS and RTI identified periods; extended and Saturday programs During the day in class and in sessions 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 96 students The school will supply the STH population with school supplies, uniform shirts, reading books for their book baggies, AIS in reading and math during and after-school, mandated and at-risk counseling to support their academic progress and social-emotional growth. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our teacher retention rate is very high. However, the administration continues to recruit new staff through hiring fairs sponsored by the New York City Department of Education, through the use of the Open Market System, and through referral from staff and other colleagues. Our high retention rate is affected positively by the school's dedicated commitment to creating and integrating positions for teachers to become lead teachers and teacher leaders and to assume the role of a leader in a collaborative environment. Teachers are empowered to make decisions at PS/MS 20, and therefore, they feel and know they are respected, and their profession is one held in high regard. First and second-year teachers participate in the mentor program. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). New teachers, un-tenured teachers, and teachers who are identified for needed support participate in our New Teacher Mentor Program and receive two years of mentoring from seasoned teachers The school has a long-term professional development plan that aligns with state standards, assessments, and curriculum. Ongoing, compensated professional development is offered to teachers to improve teacher knowledge, and increase skills in methods to improve student behavior, differentiate instruction for at-risk students, and align CCLS to content area curriculum maps and performance tasks. The administration also supports teacher opportunities to receive professional development through outside sources at workshops, conferences, and inter-school visits, etc. As a professional development school, PS/MS 20 seeks to provide its faculty and staff with opportunities that encourage collegiality through scheduled common planning time, on grade level teams, and working vertically throughout the grades. Each year teachers have the opportunity to apply to be a Teacher Leader, AIS provider, and a mentor, all opportunities that support their growth. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  The principal participates in the Leadership Academy and SAM - School Administrator Management; administrators attend workshops. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). To prepare our pre-school students for the transition to Kindergarten, the delivery of the ELA and math curricula align with the CCLS. Pre-school students and newcomers to school, attend a kindergarten orientation. They spend the day in a Kindergarten setting, meet teachers, observe a Kindergarten class and participate in learning activities. The parents participate in an orientation, which includes a meet and greet with the principal and teachers. During the school year, our Pre-K classroom teacher works closely providing learning opportunities for her students to integrate into Kindergarten events and activities, through visits to our Kindergarten classes, on an informal basis. Also, our students are serviced by faculty members in Art, Music, Library and Gym. Some of these classes are held in the main building, and students gain familiarity with the facilities of the main building, as well as, our play yards. During the school year, the administrators and the SBST work closely with the classroom teacher, the educational assistants, and the parents to provide any necessary early intervention services or recommendations to make the transition into Kindergarten as smooth as possible. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The teachers' decision-making process includes the implementation of universal screening three times per year. This process includes administering MOSL performance tasks for reading and math, and DRP reading in grades 6-8. This screening is used as a baseline in September to identify students who may be at risk. Teachers in collaborative inquiry teams analyze the data and then identify research supported methodologies and resources to implement and impact student progress. Progress monitoring is ongoing. When progress monitoring, using the universal screening tool, together with formative and summative assessments, indicate insufficient progress, analysis and professional development will target additional avenues of intervention. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $ 992,787 $ 16,979 $163,946 $ 92,073 $ 31,438 0 $ 6,841,145 X X X X X N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e N/A 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Police Officer George J. Werdann III, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A ESSA, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection, between the school and the families, that supports student achievement . The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to participate in the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee and as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Police Officer George J. Werdann III will support parents and families of Title I students by: Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology. Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children. Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress. Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments. Sharing information about the school and parent-related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills, and cultural competency to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review, and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact.  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills.  Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact. Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills.  Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.  Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home.  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report.  Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting before December 1st each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program and about the school’s Title I funded program(s). The parents right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational programs and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions.   Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed.  Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49 Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  Hold an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference.  Encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee;. Support or host Family Day events.   Establish a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents.  Encourage more parents to become trained school volunteers.  Provide written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress.  Develop and distribute a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress.  Provide school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS 20, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● use academic learning time efficiently. ● respect cultural, racial and ethnic differences. ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA Act. , I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:   conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting before December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50    arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy, and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services to communicate efficiently with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming, respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives at school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promoting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms, and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation, and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: *Rationale for after school and Saturday program: The Title III program this year focuses on instruction in literacy, mathematics and the development of skills necessary to meet proficiency on NYS assessments. The program also aims to develop the competencies necessary for learning on par with English speaking peers in standard curriculum instruction. The program will emphasize the effective skills necessary fo reading and writing and academic success in the classroom and beyond it. Special attention will be paid to the alignment of the instruction to the linguistic proficiency of students in order to appropriately monitor students' English language development, as well as, their acquisition of content area knowledge. - After School program will focus on students newly arrived to the United States of America - teachers will be focusing on developing BICS. *Subgroups: All ELL students in grades K through 8th are targeted for participation. - After school - students in grades K-8 *Schedule and Duration: Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 to 4:30. *Language of Instruction: The language of instruction will be English with guided native language support in Spanish and Bengali. *Number and types of certified teachers: The program will be supported by 6 certified ENL teachers: *Types of materials: Writing for Purpose Rehearsing for Common Core Standards - Reading Preparing for the Common Core Standards - Reading by Strand Applying the Common Core Standards - Mathematics by Domain Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT Leveled Classroom Libraries Trade Books/Library Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: The focus of our professional development is to develop teacher capacities in supporting both language development and content area learning on the part of our ELL students. ENL and content area teachers work in a collaborative setting to provide support to students in our programs. The Lead Teachers specializing in ENL, Literacy and Math provide professional development to teachers in our after-school programs. Teachers are provided with professional development to support content area instruction in Literacy and Math in the following areas: *Using Assessments to Drive Differentiated Instructions *Differentiating Teaching and Learning for ELLs *Creating Entry Points for ELLs *Planning for ELLs *Aligning Instruction to CCLS and Linguistic Proficiency Levels *Understanding the progress monitoring system in place using WIDA Additional support and professional development is received through the workshops provided by our ELA consultant, TC coach and Math coach. The consultant and TC coach will support the teachers with practical strategies to make reading, writing, and mathematical skills transparent and accessible to English Language Learners. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents are invited to attend orientation meetings . They are also invited to parent workshops on how to help their children with homework and adjusting to the new environment. Translation services are provided on an ongoing and as needed basis in the covered languages. Our parental involvement activities address parent needs: *Educating parents on expected pace of language acquisition and existing progress monitoring for ELLs using WIDA *Workshops to address topics including mental health, legal issues for immigrants, use of technology, how to help their children at home, etc. To inform parents about activities taking place in our school, we: *send flayers and newsletters *make phone calls *use automated phone messaging system 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. The ENL teachers will receive professional development for the TC coach and the Consultants for ELA and Math. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 20,000  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 15,000 4,510 34510 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name PS/MS 20 Borough Bronx School Number 020 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Carla Ling Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher George Lynch Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Maribel Hulla Torres Assistant Principal IZABELA KACZMAREK Coach type here School Counselor Melissa Rozon Parent Zulay Rodriguez Parent Coordinator JAEL JONES Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 6 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1076 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58 Total number of ELLs 300 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 27.88%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Lang. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Assessment tools used to assess the early literacy skills of ELLs include MYON, IXL, Fontas and Pinnell, and DRP., NYSESLAT and NYSITELL and if necessary other secondary diagnostic tests. This data provides us with insights into the students' strengths and weaknesses in phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, reading comprehension and fluency. The data informs the instructional targets. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Review three time a year. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  Progress monitoring throughout the year, NYSESLAT BOY and EOY for MOSL, Unit Test, TC Writing Assessment, F&P (3x a year) results, ongoing progress as reported by the ESL teachers on our report cards which are aligned with WIDA. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Data cycles three times a year in ELA and Math. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data is used to group students according to the five levels we use both ENL freestanding i.e., pull out programs for RTI and small group instruction takes place on a daily basis with targeted learning objectives and frequent progress monitoring. If the student is not making progress as measured by the interim progress monitoring assessments the instructional approach and perhaps the resources used are changed. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Although there was a change in the delivery and scoring of the NYSESLAT, overall results show a decline in the percent of students meeting proficiency and attaining the advanced level. The number of students at the Commanding level was 19%, a decline of 7.7%. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of the year the NYSESLAT, June Reports, and the ITAs are reviewed to plan for the learning supports. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: There are two ENL teachers in grades K-2. Each teacher is assigned a grade and within that grade provides instruction to English Language Learners in homogeneous groups. There are two ENL teachers in grades 3-5. English Language Learners are grouped heterogeneously and receive ENL instruction in Stand-Alone and Integrated models throughout the day in both Literacy and Mathematics. There is two ENL teacher in grades 6-8. English Language Learners are grouped heterogeneously and receive ENL instruction in Stand-Alone and Integrated models throughout the day in both Literacy and Mathematics. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  Paste response to questions here: Having 6 ENL teachers allows PS/MS 20 to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to proficiency levels in Freestanding ENL program. Because the largest numbers of English Language Learners are in grades K-2, the school ensured that there is one teacher per grade who is able to provide the necessary services to all of the students. It was important to PS/MS 20 to provide instructional support to English Language Learners in grades 3-8 in both testing courses (ELA and Mathematics) therefore we do have teachers in place to teach English as New Language/English Language Arts and Mathematics. In order to meet the following proficiency levels, Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, Commanding Units of Study and staffing requirements, we have scheduled and programmed both stand alone ENL learning opportunities with certified ESL teachers, integrated K-6 content area classes with teachers who are dual certified and we have integrated K-6 classes with a certified ESL teacher and common branch teacher as well as integrated classes 7 through 8 with a certified ESL teacher and content area certified teacher. Additionally, we have a bilingual teacher teaching content area subjects as a stand alone. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: Content area classes are delivered in English using ENL based teaching and learning strategies such as: a) use of visuals b) hands on activities c) differentiated entry points d) team teaching to promote positive interdependence, collaborative group structure - heterogeneous , peer and buddy learning system e) scaffolded language and content learning activities f) leveled libraries, high interest lower difficulty texts g) picture dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries h) alternate assessments At PS/MS 20 we put particular emphasis on students being engaged and participating in class discussions and explaining their answers using textual evidence . In addition, in upper grades teachers emphasize students' ability to express and defend their opinions as well as develop an argument as it is outlined by grade level standards in Common Core Language Standards and Language Progressions. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: To ensure that English Language Learners are appropriately evaluated in their home language throughout the year, PS/MS 20: a) administers Spanish Lab test to those Spanish speaking students who did not pass the NYSITELL b) for state Mathematics and Science exams copies of those exams are ordered in home languages of ELLs who need that support c) staff members who speak other languages than English provide interpretation and translation support to English Language Learners and their parents d) alternate language paraprofessionals support English Language Learners in special education classes e) we outreach to NYC DOE bank of translators to screen and evaluate students in their preferred home language 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: a. There are __ students at our school currently identified as SIFE. ENL teachers target SIFE students for their Tier 3 small 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  group instruction within their self contained classes and out of classroom ENL teachers provide them with additional small group and one on one instruction time during the day. MYON an Internet based reading program is provided so that these students can work both during the school day and at home on their English language acquisition. Students are also invited to attend Title III Program on Wednesdays -Fridays from 2:30 to 4:30 as well as Saturday Academy from 9am to 12. Special attention is paid to aligning assessments to the linguistic proficiency of students in order to appropriately monitor students' English language development, as well as, their acquisition of content area knowledge. b. Similarly ELL students, new comers, are targeted for Tier 3 small group instruction 5 times per week within their self -contained classes. Differentiated lessons are adapted to address the needs of these students in terms of their proficiency levels in English with some guided native language support provided whenever possible by the classroom teachers and or alternate language educational assistants. c. For ELLs of 4 to 6 years, during the school day teachers focus on developing content area reading strategies, higher order thinking skills, task specific assessments, varied participation techniques, scaffolding of language development, and on specific content learning strategies. d. ELL students beyond 6 years are also invited to participate in our after school and Saturday literacy and math program with a focus on writing. They are also provided with additional test prep materials specifically tailored to the NYSESLAT. In this way targeted instruction includes NYSESLAT formats. e. Former ELLs are progress monitored every 4 to 6 weeks to ensure their continued English language and content area development. Students who are found to be below grade level expectations are provided additional support based on their RTI Tier designation. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: Instructional strategies for ELLs in self contained special education classes similarly include: simplifying the input (verbal and written instructions), scaffolding of information through the use of graphic organizers, Total Physical Reponse and Role Play, connections to primary language and cultures through guided native langauage and through cultural based activities, sufficient "wait time" "think time", sufficient practice and reinforcement activities, ongoing comprehension checks (both oral and written), use of contextual clues, frequent checks for understanding, learning that is learner centered and content driven, accessing students' prior knowledge, building background knowledge, using drawings, photographs, and common objects, categorizing activities, addressing listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills throughout instruction, repetition, and developing parent partnerships through home school communication of skills in need of additional practice. Depending on the proficiency level needs of students, ENL teachers use: a)TC Writing Units- Intervention b) Inter-active and shared reading to teach a skill for the students to practice during independent reading. c) Small group and guided reading instruction d) Fundations e) Orton-Gillingham and Wilson 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: English Language Learners with special needs are provided scheduling felxibility as per their IEP criteria. For example, an ENL teacher pushes into the Special Education classes to provide these students with ENL services to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. ESL teachers in partnership with Special Education teachers create specifically designed instruction for each special education ELL student according to the specific disabilities indicated in the student's IEP. This includes research based differentiated and intervention strategies along with specific accommodations and modifications of content. Strategies included are as follows: visual supports, repetition, simplifying input (verbal or written instructions), scaffolding, Total Physical Response (TPR), extended time, teaching one concept at a time and allowing sufficient processing time, categorizing activities, sharing instructinal methods with parents for home practice, use of drawing, photographs, and common objects, use of technology, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  use of sensory feedback techniques (tactile letters), clear and explicit instructions and expectations. Instructional strategies for ELLs in self contained special education classes similarly include: simplifying the input (verbal and written instructions), scaffolding of information through the use of graphic organizers, Total Physical Reponse and Role Play, connections to primary language and cultures through guided native langauage and through cultural based activities, sufficient "wait time" "think time", sufficient practice and reinforcement activities, ongoing comprehension checks (both oral and written), use of contextual clues, frequent checks for understanding, learning that is learner centered and content driven, accessing students' prior knowledge, building background knowledge, using drawings, photographs, and common objects, categorizing activities, addressing listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills throughout instruction, repetition, and developing parent partnerships through home school communication of skills in need of additional practice. Students with IEPs in special education classes are provided ENL support in their self contained classes. In addition ELLs in special education classes are pulled out to receive services from our out of classroom ENL teachers to provide these students with exposure time to other ENL students in a less restrictive environment. Flexibility is built into the programming through the programming of our out of classroom ENL specialists. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math, and other content areas: a) Teachers administer benchmark assessment and formative assessments every 4 to 5 weeks. Teachers analyze data results for areas of needed improvement. Teachers form RTI groups and target groups for specific skills that need to be improved upon and focus on re-teaching and on progress monitoring in literacy and in math. Content areas, Social Studies and Science are similarly addressed. Students identified as first time testers in ELA are provided additional support through our extended day program and through our test prep Saturday academies. Targeted recent arrival (0-2 years of service) students are invited to participate in the Title III program for additional support. Social studies skills for intermediate and advanced NYSESLAT students are addressed through classroom instruction and practice on Document Based Questions and through interdisciplinary units that focus on developing students' ability to read increasingly complex texts and through writing tasks that develop students' critical thinking skills. We have speakers of Spanish, Albanian, Hindi, Urdu, Bengali on staff. Guided native language instruction is provided by ENL teachers or by push in or pull out ENL specialists. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: PS/MS 20 will definitely comply with the new requirement as per Part 154. We will ensure that our students receive the mandated services and are grouped into the new five proficiency levels. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: Our CBO Montifiore Community Center provides many of our ELLs in grades K-8 additional homework help and opportunities to participate in arts activities after school on Mondays through Fridays until 6pm. This program is especially important to our parents who work and are not able to pick up their children until 6pm. This program is also supports parents who are non English speakers and who thus may not be able to help their children with their homework. All ELLs are invited to attend both the extended day program from 2:30pm to 3:30 pm after school program on Wednesdays and Thursdays. ELL students are also invited to our Saturday academy for ELA and Math test prep. PS/MS 20 schedules field trips to help build background knowledge and to support writing development based on real life experiences. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  ELLs are encouraged to participate in our music program (lower school and middle school chorus) and in all our middle school sports programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: a) TC Writing Units b) MYON c) IXL d) NYSESLAT prep materials e) Fundations f) Guided Reading Leveled Library g) Orton-Gillingham and Wilson 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: We have speakers of Spanish, Albanian, Hindi, Urdu, Bengali on staff. Guided native language instruction is provided by ENL teachers or by push in or pull out ENL specialists. Alternate language paraprofessional provides native language support in Spanish. Additionally, home language materials are used as forms of multicultural enrichment as as content learning resources. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: All of our ENL teachers are certified. The teachers use materials and methodologies that correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. Teachers follow the sequence of the programs used at PS/MS 20. The programs used are aligned to the Common Core Language Standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: a) TC Writing Units b) MYON c) IXL d) NYSESLAT prep materials e) Fundations f) Guided Reading Leveled Library g) Orton-Gillingham and Wilson 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: We do not have a program for newly enrolled ELLs over the summer at this time. Most of our newly enrolled students are K students. Parents were invited to participate in an orientation session (June 13, 2015) and during that session they were provided with information as to what students should know and be able to do before they enter school in September. In this way parents can work with their students before entering school in September. During the regular school year identified ELLs are provided extended day instruction on Wednesdays - Fridays from 2:30 to 4:30. ELLs are also encouraged to attend our Saturday Academies for test prep. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  Paste response to question here: N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: All teachers in grades K - 8 received professional development in SIOP lesson planning and lesson delivery. It is the expectation that all teachers use the knowledge gained and plan for their instruction utilizing that model. Throughout the 2015-2016 school year all ELL personnel will participate in professional development in using ENL Progress Reports developed using WIDA. These progress reports will provide teachers with a clear understanding of what the expectations of English Language Learners are depending on their language proficiency. Teacher of ELLs are: Izabela Campbell Kaczmarek, Assistant Principal, ESL Certified, George Lynch, ESL, Sharon Reifer, ESL, Leah SacutoDaley, ESL, Urmi Sarkar, ESL and Christina Perez-Padilla, Bilingual. Professional Development days are every Monday from 2:20 - 3:40 for the 2015-16 school year and in addition one period per week are assigned to a professional development workshop within a common prep timeframe. November 3, all ell teachers are involved in ELL workshops all day. Paste response to question here: a) All teachers in grades K - 8 received professional development in SIOP lesson planning and lesson delivery. It is the expectation that all teachers use the knowledge gained and planed for their instruction utilizing that model. Throughout the 2015-2016 school year: a) All teachers in grade K - 3 will participate in ASTOR grant where they will deepen their knowledge about differentiation and meeting the needs of all students including English Language Learners. b) All teachers will participate in Professional Learning Cycles where they will have a chance to read current research, discuss it with their peers, and implement in their classrooms while receiving timely and constructive feedback. c) All teachers will participate in study groups during Common Preps where they will analyze data, create next instructional steps, and share their noticings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: Throughout the school year we will provide multiple professional development opportunities for all teachers to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle and middleto high school. These opportunities will include but will not be limited to: a) professional development in SIOP lesson planning and lesson delivery. It is the expectation that all teachers use the knowledge gained and plan for their instruction utilizing that model. b) using ENL Progress Reports developed using WIDA. These progress reports will provide teachers with a clear understanding 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  of what the expectations of English Language Learners are depending on their language proficiency. c) all teachers in grade K - 3 will participate in ASTOR grant where they will deepen their knowledge about differentiation and meeting the needs of all students including English Language Learners. d) all teachers will participate in Professional Learning Cycles where they will have a chance to read current research, discuss it with their peers, and implement in their classrooms while receiving timely and constructive feedback. e) all teachers will participate in study groups during Common Preps where they will analyze data, create next instructional steps, and share their noticings. Recently, our Guidance Counselor, Fiodaliza Connell attended the NYCDOE all day workshop on October 21, 2015. This expo was focused on families and how guidance counselors can support families who have recently immigrated to the United States help them transition in both their communities and certainly in school. Paste response to question here: As specified earlier, PS/MS 20 meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2. Based on the Professional Development Plan, for all teachers more than 15% of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. For ENL teachers, more than 50% of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. During of these meeting the attendance will be taken and for each meeting an agenda with goals and anticipated outcomes will be written. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: Parents are invited to attend orientation meetings, curriculum night, parent teacher conferences, Tuesdays professional development hours from 2:20 till 3:35, and parent workshops on a) how to help students with homework b) understand Common Core Learning Standards c) complete an application process for Middle and High Schools d) testing e) adjust to new environment. Translations services are provided on an ongoing and as needed basis in Spanish, Bengali, Albanian, and Urdu or any other of the covered languages. We will make a stronger effort to invite parents in during the instructional day to observe their children’s’ classes and to participate in interactive learning activities and learning celebrations. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to question here: Parent workshops are scheduled to build parents' capacity to support their child's development in reading and writing. Workshops focus on a variety of topics including "Tips on How to Help Your Child Succeed in School", "How to use Rosetta Stone", "Understanding the NYS Assessments and Understanding the Outcomes." Workshops are conducted after school and on Saturdays. Workshops are presented by ENL teachers, content-area teachers, and other appropriate staff. Parents are notified through flyers, through phone calls made by our Family Worker, and through the automated phone system. All flyers and notices to parents regarding workshops and/or meetings are translated into the covered languages. We also provide translators at our meetings and workshops through the use of either staff or parent association members. The Parent Coordinator is part of the administrative team working under the supervision of the principal. The Parent Coordinator will engage with and involve parents in the school community by working with the principal, school staff, school leadership team, parent associations, community groups and parent advisory councils. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  This position focuses on creating a welcoming environment for parents. The Parent Coordinator will identify parent and related school/community issues and work with the principal to see they are addressed in a timely manner. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joan Riley, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PO George J. Werdann,III School DBN: 10X020 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Carla Ling Title Principal Izabela Campbell Kaczmarek Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator George Lynch ENL/Bilingual Teacher Zulay Rodriguez Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Melissa Rozon School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/18 1/1/01 10/30/18 10/30/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/30/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X020 School Name: PS/MS 20 Superintendent: Maribel Hulla T The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Judith Izabela Kelvin Ivette Lizette Rodriguez Pupil Accounting Secretary Kaczmarek Assistant Principal Lopez Fischer Rivera Teacher Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator no no no no no yes yes yes yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication, PS/MS 20 uses: a) Home Language Identification Survey - Part III 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  b) ATS report - Home Language Report - RHLA c) Student Emergency Cards d) Teacher surveys conducted at the beginning of the school year 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Parents' preferred languages are as follow: Albanian, Baluchi, Bulgarian, Chinese, English, French, Fulani, Italian, Hindi, Hungarian, Khmer (AKA Camoge), Mandinka (AKA Mandingo), Spanish Punjabi, Slovak, , Tamil, Ukrainian, Urdu English 100 English 100 English Spanish English 100 95 100 English Spanish English 100 100 100 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish and English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Some of the documents that PS/MS 20 disseminates every year that require Families will receive notification of the F&P three times a year. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The school uses the Spanish teacher to translate documents that are sent to the parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71 The school uses Big Word for translation services for face to face meets with parents. translation and are distributed to families are as follow: Families will recieve student a) notices written by Department of Education progress report three times a year prior to the distribution of the school report cards. b) registration and application documentation Families will have access to the students grades via Pupil Path. c) letters from the school leadership d) notices from Parent Association Families will be invited to writing celebration via parent calendar or teacher notification. Reminder notices will be sent via instant messages on Pupil Path. Monthly calendar Reminder notices Pupil Path Monthly calendar Reminder notices Pupil Path Monthly calendar Reminder notices Pupil Path e) parent-teacher conference announcements f) New York State testing dates - ELA, Mathematics, Science, NYSESLAT g) after-school program information h) calendared events (holidays, school closings, etc.) The school uses the Spanish teacher to translate documents that are sent to the parents. The school uses Big Word for translation services for face to face meets with parents. The school uses the Spanish teacher to translate documents that are sent to the parents. The school uses Big Word for translation services for face to face meets with parents. The school uses the Spanish teacher to translate documents that are sent to the parents. The school uses Big Word for translation services for face to face meets with parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Some of the face-to-face meetings PS/MS 20 typically have with parents throughout the school year are as follow: a) Open School Night - September 13, 2018 b) parent-teacher conferences - November 14, 2018, March 13, 2019, and May 15, 2019 c) Tuesdays when school is in session from 2:20 till 3:00, teachers will be meeting with parents for conferences d) workshops re: curriculum, CCLS, NYS testing, parenting classes, high school Admission process, K orientation, Pre-K orientation - dates to be determined Some of the anticipated informal interactions with parents include but are not limited to phone calls and home visits from: a) attendance teacher b) Guided Counselor c) Family Workers d) Social Workers e)School Psychologists f) Dean g) Parent Coordinator h) Teachers i) Administrators A monthly calendar is sent to the parents regarding parent meeting at the school at the beginning of the month. Reminder notices Pupil Path The school provides language interpeters in three languages for PTC twice a year in Spanish, Arabic, and Bangali. The school uses the Spanish teacher to translate documents that are sent to the parents. The school uses Big Word for translation services for face to face meetings with parents. A monthly calendar is sent to the parents regarding parent meeting at the school at the beginning of the month. The school uses the Spanish teacher to translate documents that are sent to the parents. Reminder notices Pupil Path The school uses Big Word for translation services for face to face meetings with parents. A monthly calendar is sent to the parents regarding parent meeting at the school at the beginning of the month. Reminder notices Pupil Path Phone Calls The school uses the Spanish teacher to translate documents that are sent to the parents. The school uses Big Word for translation services for face to face meetings with parents. A monthly calendar is sent to the parents regarding parent meeting at the school at the beginning of the month. The school uses the Spanish teacher to translate documents that are sent to the parents. Reminder notices The school uses Big Word for translation services for face to face meetings with parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  Pupil Path Phone calls 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Pupil Path translates the inforamtion sent to the parents in their home language that is entered at admission to the school. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff meetings Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, PS/MS 20 will: a) Distribute Parents' Bill of Right in all covered languages b) Display the Welcome Poster in numerous places around the school, such as entrance, main lobby, main office, etc. c) Display Language ID Guide at the security desk and main office for the parents to identify their preferred language d) Inform parents of their right to access information about their child and school in their preferred language (part of the Parents' Bill of Rights) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74  To gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services, PS/MS 20 will conduct surveys and adjust its planning to meet the needs of all parents and guardians. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 75 
