2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X028 School Name: P.S. 028 MOUNT HOPE Principal: STEPHEN BECKLES 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Mount Hope Centennial School 09x028 School Number (DBN): 320900010028 Pre-K - Grade 5 1861 Anthony Avenue Bronx, NY 10457 718-583-6444 Phone Number: 718-583-6537 Fax: Maria Emanuele MEmanuele@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Stephen Beckles Edwin Fonseca Martha Martinez Elizabeth Martinez YuviaGutierrez N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 9 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mrs. Leticia Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue Bronx, NY 10456 LRosario2 @schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-579-7143 Phone Number: 718-583-6537 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mr. Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Mr. Stephen Beckles Mr. Edwin Fonseca Ms. Martha Martinez Ms. MarriannaDeLaCruz Elizabeth Martinez N/A N/A N/A Kathy Betances Lee Albring Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ Member/UFT Member/ UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  YuviaGutierrez Eileen Bresnan N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At the Mt. Hope Centennial School, we believe that all children can and will learn. To ensure that all children will reach their potential…  We will maintain high expectations and promote academic excellence for all students.  We will create and support a school environment in which all children and adults feel welcomed, respected, trusted and an important part of the school.  We will create an environment where we can learn together and support each other. 2018-19 CEP 9  We will foster a positive school climate of a caring community which respects and values diversity and nurtures everyone’s self-esteem. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. In our effort to create a learning environment that is aligned to The Framework for Great Schools, The Mount Hope Centennial School has established a number of partnerships with various outside sources, as well as created instructional programs that exceed the expectations inherent to all schools with in New York City. This would include the installation of a UFT Teacher Center, partnerships with Councilman Torres, CITE, River on the Go-Bronx Museum, Theater Moves, Mighty Milers, Fitness graham, NYC Parks and Recreational Foundation, Montefiore Health and Hospital Center, SCAN Program, and collaborations with several published authors. Along with this, we have created learning opportunities that provides enrichment and remediation to all of our students, regardless to their learning specifications, this would include academic academies, a Student Council, basketball team and chess team, and yearbook committee. We toohave enriched our content based curriculum by infusing into teachers’ instructional practices researched based programs such as iReady Online Assessments, which serves to provide teachers and school administration with data that will drive instruction and allow for modifications to be made to instruction and curriculum, which will then invariably heighten student level of academic achievement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As like many NYC Elementary Schools, the Mount Hope Centennial School is populated by a number of students with specific needs. This would include: Students taught in English Native Language settings   General Education Students (Pre-K-Grade 5)  Students with Special Needs: Self-Contained Special Education Classes, Children Identified with Autism which are taught through the Horizon Program, including Inclusion Collaborative Teaching, and Bilingual Special Education Students  Bilingual Students  Students residing in Temporary Housing To ensure that each one of the above mentioned populations are provided with the services that is either mandated on student’s IEPs or by parent recommendations, we too provide our students with medical/health support through an in house clinic that is affiliated to Montefiore Medical Center. This facility provides our students with not only the health services that are necessary to ensure children’s physical well-being, but also provides students with counseling, which addresses any social-emotional needs they may have. It has consistently been our practice to create a learning environment which is based upon collaboration. Therefore, the installation and maintenance of a School Assessment Team is essential to ensure that each child is provided with equity and non-discriminatory assessment evaluations that are essential to the child’s learning. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As was annotated in the Principal’s Performance Review/Measures of Leadership Practice, praise was given to the school and its administration in providing high expectations to the entire staff by providing all shareholders with professional development that supports these tenants. It is this which correlates to maintaining the supportive and collaborative learning environment, which are key elements made mention on the Framework for Great Schools. As we continue to heighten student achievement and increase learning opportunities, we will remain loyal to the following: a) Continue to align our assessments to the curricula, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. b) Continue to embed higher order 2018-19 CEP 10  thinking questions (based upon Depth of Knowledge levels 3 and 4) in our units of study, which will then promote discussion amongst student peers, c) Continue to embed in the school’s culture levels of distributive leadership; thereby ensuring that all stakeholders are given opportunity to voice their concerns, and to utilize specific curricular programs that will allow for higher levels of academic continuity to be achieved. d) Refine our units of study in all content areas to ensure that they are cohesive throughout the school’s grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X028 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 720 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 95 95 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 7 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 92.5% % Reduced Lunch 29.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 78.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.08 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 24.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 63% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 35 35 90.0% 1.0% 23.1% 18.8% 1.0% 0.4% 4 4% 7.1 29.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In an effort to meet the instructional demands of CCLS aligned curriculum that thoroughly encompasses the instructional shifts advocated by both city and state, PS 28X has historically implemented a number of instructional vehicles that presents to its students content based literature that enables all students, regardless to their learning/student classification, to respond (both verbally and in written form) to inquiries that requires them to substantiate their conclusions by means of a number of conventions. This process, which commonly referred to as the “Close” method, would include making text to text, text to self, and text to world connections, being able to extrapolate and then analyze key elements from a text to respond to a myriad of literary based questions, to be able to initially determine the gist of a manuscript, and for students to self - evaluate their work. In moving forward, it is our intention to promote greater consistency in matters pertaining to providing students with highly scaffold and differentiated instruction, so that all students are challenged and are provided with opportunities to confer with one another, in effort to provide meaningful academic feedback to one another. This then will reinforce the idea of trust building among students and staff. Therefore it becomes extremely important that we create, maintain and evaluate those professional development opportunities that are offered to our school's instructional staff which will then leverage student's academic achievement When considering the growth P.S. 28X has made in the area of literacy, it becomes clear that our school's professional development plans has statistically made a positive impact upon student achievement. During the 2016-2017 academic school year, more than 80% of those students tested by means of the NY State ELA Exam achieved scores which are considered passing. This too was replicated in the NY State Mathematics Examination for grades three through five. This shows statistically significant increase in student proficiency in both reading and mathematics. In our effort to continue this pattern of growth, a number of structures have been embedded in our professional development plan, including professional development activities that speaks specifically to differentiating instruction, examining the connections good readers and writers make, taking a critical look at our newly embedded reading program, transitioning our bilingual reading program into one which embraces those instructional ideas inherent to a dual language instructional program, and looking carefully at those instructional practices that must be present in small group instruction ie. guided reading. 2018-19 CEP 13  Taking all of this into account, and by conducting rigorous monitoring systems that allows for transparency to be achieved, the expectation of trust will be evident as measured by achievement made by students academically. As we move forward, it becomes imperative that we must continue to analyze our instructional practices, assign highly qualified mentors to guide our newly hired teachers, and to provide parents with supportive workshops/informational sessions that will inform them of the many curricular shifts that has bearings on their child's academic success, especially as they relate to standardized testing in ELA. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, teachers will embed questions that support deep discussion across all content areas to ensure access for all learners as demonstrated by a reduced number of students at Level 1 in English Language Arts 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development opportunities are identified, in order to deepen their understanding of the instructional shifts and how to embed these into their teaching practices; with special consideration being given to those teachers that instruct our school’ s Special Needs students and English Language Learners. Teachers in Grades Pre K - 5 Sept. 2018-June 2019 ELA Coach: grs 3-5, Reading Coach for grade 2, Teacher Center, I.E.P Teacher, ESL Service providers, The New Teacher Center Mentoring School Administration: Principal Assistant Principals, Coaches, and Teacher Center Teachers, School Administration: Teachers in Grades Pre K - 5 Sept. 2018: DRA MOSL K-3, Sept 9, 2017 Writing Baseline, November 2017 ELA practice Exam Gr. 3-5, Jan. 2019 Mid-Year Assessment/ Principal and Assistant Principals, School Based Literacy Coach, Teacher Center Running Records, Feb. 2019, ELA Practice Exam, gr. 3-5, June 2019 F & P, Gr K - 5  In terms of resources, teachers have been supplied with new instructional and assessment tools that are reflective of the Common Core such as: F & P Reading Assessment Tool and I Ready Online Assessment(all of which is administered school wide), TC Reading and Writing, “Wonders”(from gr. K-5) to support their understanding of the CCLS for the grade level and to instructionally address these new standards  Use of on -going data (F & P, I Ready, and Wonders  baseline) will be reviewed for trends, thereby allowing for strengths and deficits to be identified and addressed on an ongoing basis. Teachers will be provided with professional development activities that will deconstruct literacy standards, thereby allowing them to determine if the currently used forms and types of assessment truly measures that which is being taught in the classroom, and is grade level appropriate. At various points within the school year, parents will be provided with workshops that speaks to how they can assist their children in not just completing assigned homework tasks, but offer suggestions in how they can both remediate and enrich their child's learning by the use of the I Ready online program. This program will allow for parents to get a better understanding of that which is taught by teachers in each grade level. • Teachers will analyze student data (both formal and informal) to determine individual student and class needs, as well as to develop appropriate student learning outcomes and goals. This activity is one which will be conducted on a on-going basis. Teachers in Grades Pre K – 5 and School Wide Sept. 2018 – June 2019 School Administration and School Wide Data Specialist 2018-19 CEP 15 Which would then allow for modification to be made to our existing units of study and curriculum maps. Data Specialist 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. It has and will continue to be our policy to inform parents of all matters that pertains to instruction by means of the following: School Leadership Team (Monthly from Sept.-June )  Curriculum Night (September 2018)   Parent Teacher Association  Parent Teacher Conferences(Nov. 2018, March 2019, & May 2019)   Written Bulletins (Monthly)  Classroom Dojo (Weekly)  Professional Development opportunities specifically geared to parents in matters pertaining to Literacy and School News Letter (Monthly) Mathematics  Workshops facilitated Girls & Guys Empowerment  Workshops facilitated by Coaches and Teacher Center  Professional Development opportunities provided by Specialist from the Bronx Field Support Center  Conferences for parents provided by District 9 Family Leadership Coordinator  Horizon Parent Meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment, running records, Teacher’s College Writing Initiative, IReady Assessment, “Wonders” Literacy /Reading Program, GoMath Mathematics Program, Passport Social Studies Program, NY State Elementary Science Program, MOSL Math Periodic Assessments, Edmark/Explode the Code RTI Assessments, Literacy Coaches, Data Specialist, Teacher Center, SMARTBoards, laptops, desktops, IPADS, classroom libraries, New Teacher Center Mentoring, Lower Grade Reading Coach, Instructional Consultants from Wonders (2X per school year), IReady (2Xper school year), Teacher Center (4x per school year) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. • In our effort to ensure that we as a school are engaged in progress monitoring academically, the following mid- year assessment tools will be utilized in either Jan or Feb of the 2019 academic school year: Fountas and Pinnell Reading 2018-19 CEP 16  Assessment I Ready Online Assessment, My On (Personalized Reading Program), “Wonders” Reading Program Unit Examinations. Ultimately, progress monitoring activities will take place during the end of February 2019, which would involve all grade level teachers, coaches, and school administration, to determine the effectiveness of all instructional programs. Examination of instructional programs will be conducted during teacher team weekly meetings. • Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment : January 2019, I Ready Online Assessment; February 2019, Waterford Online Assessment: February 2019, “Wonders” Assessments: Ongoing throughout the 2018/2019 academic school year, per session hours given to teachers to participate in after-school literacy academy, and putting into place the Writer's Workshop from Teacher's College. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment   Online assessment “Wonders” Reading Program Unit Examinations  Writer's Workshop from Teacher's College      Edmark" "Ready" by Rally "Woodcock Johnson" "Explode the Code" "Reading A to Z" Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Mt Hope Centennial School firmly attributes its “Effective” rating on its last Quality Review in the area of creating a supportive environment to its commonly shared idea (by all stakeholders) and its overall “Effective” rating on the 2017/2018 APPR that an effective school is one that satisfies student’s basic psychological need for safety, belonging, autonomy, and competence. Every educator here understands that when these basic needs are fulfilled, our students are more likely to become engaged in and committed to the school, and therefore more inclined to behave in accord with our expressed goals and values. Additionally, we accept and are committed to the aims of improving achievement and other student outcomes by strengthening school climate and relationships between students, parents, teachers, administrators, and other school staff. If we are to accept the idea that a child’s future can to some degree be shaped by the things they do in the hours after school and before their parent(s) get home, extracurricular activities could have a positive qualitative and quantitative impact upon a student’s level of academic achievement. As was previously made mentioned of in Section 5A Part 1, our students have made strides in matters pertaining to academic achievement, as measured by the number of Level 3 & 4 students on the NYS English Language Arts examination, the NYS Math examination and the number of students now being classified as attaining "Commanding" levels on the NYSELAT examination. Specifically, as has been made note of from NYS ELA Exam, our school attained had a growth percentage of 43.6, and in Math standardized testing a growth percentage of 53.6 was achieved. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 teachers and coaches will develop rigorous extracurricular tasks to enhance instruction resulting in students attaining levels 3 & 4 on the NYS Reading and Mathematics examinations by 3 - 5%. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Yearbook Club will allow for all students in grades 4 and 5 to hone their writing abilities (in various literary genres), which will then produce a catalogued book of remembrances. Teachers in Grades Pre K - 5 Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Coaches, Teacher Center, and , IEP Teachers Basketball team, which is comprised of male and female students in grades 4 and 5, will meet once a week for practice, and will compete in District 9 Elementary Teachers in Grades Pre k - two School tournaments. Additionally, in an effort to sustain appropriate levels of academic achievement, students Must attend a once weekly “Study Hall” after school class. School based debate team will follow those rules governed by official debate team regulations, which will allow for more opportunities for students to converse on matters relevant to today’s world issues. ELA & Math Academy will provide all students with additional support academically. ELL academy will provide students with additional support . Teachers in Grades Pre K – Grade 5 Coaches, Teacher Center, and , IEP Teachers Coaches, Teacher Center, and , IEP Teachers, All School Administrators Sept. 2018, Math baseline, K-5, Mid Line Assessment, Jan. 2019, Pre K -2, Math End line Examination, May 2019 Sept. 2018: math base line, math practice Exam, Gr. 3-5, Dec. 2018, Math Mid-Year Gr. K-5, math practice Exam, March 2019, Gr. 3-5, Math Endline Exam, May 2019, Gr K-5 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 19  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. See previous 3B. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Go Math Curriculum, I Ready, Waterford Online Assessment, Mathematics Coach, Data Specialist, Teacher Center, SMART Boards, laptops, desktops, IPADS, and classroom assessments, Chess in the city programming. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Fountas and Pinnell Diagnostic Assessment: iReady Online Assessments MOSL Mathematics Periodic Assessment “Soar to Success Math” “ Diagnostic Interview Task” Teacher’s College Writing Assessments Formative Assessment: Lesson Quick Check in every lesson Mid-Chapter Checkpoint Teacher’s College Writing Assessments Summative Assessment: Chapter Review/Chapter Assessment Online Assessment: I Ready, Waterford Progress Monitoring Activities: · Math Practice Exam #1: December 2018 · Mid-Year/Midline Assessment: January 2019 Math practice Test #2: March 2019 2018-19 CEP 20  Teacher’s College Writing Assessments Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. See Part 5b Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At the onset of the 2018/2019 academic school year, it was determined that greater emphasis must be given to providing all teachers with professional development opportunities that is tailored to meet their individual needs. Therefore, teachers were given a questionnaire which allowed for them to articulate their pedagogical and content area concerns. This tool then allowed for them to become more reflective when determining their professional’s goals; which then provided school administration valuable data on the types of professional development needed to be structured for the school year. Our school holds weekly professional development where staff participates in tiered activities based on teacher needs and student data trends. Our professional development topics include differentiated student activities (work stations), curriculum adjustment and alignment, fluency and application in mathematics, etc. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of staff will have participated in a teacher led professional development session in order to increase student ELA and math performance as measured by the percentage of students scoring levels 3 and 4 on New York State standardized examination. Teacher attendance will be tracked using sign-in data/attendance sheets. Teacher attendance at professional development periods will allow for them to implement the instructional expectations, which will then be observed during periods of formal and informal observations, conducted by school administration. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly professional development Vertical & Horizontal planning Teacher focused PD based on Danielson Feedback Student focused PD based on school-wide data, NYS Testing Data, periodic assessment 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018 – June 2019 ELL Teachers., Literacy coach, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Center All ELL teachers and service providers of our ELL students in grades K - 5 All ELL and Bilingual Teachers Sept 2018 – June 2019 ELL Teachers., Literacy coach, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Center) ELL Teachers., Literacy coach, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Center) ELL Teachers., Literacy coach, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Center All ELL and Bilingual Teachers Sept 2018– June 2019 All ELL and Bilingual Teachers Sept 2018– June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. See previous 3B. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 23  F & P, IReady, Imagine Learning, Benchmark Writing Program, Wonders, DIBELS, Universal Literacy Coach, Data Specialist, Teacher Center, SMARTBoards, laptops, desktops, IPADS, classroom libraries, ESL Teachers, Instructional Support Staff from the Bronx Field Support Center. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment, Teacher’s College Writing Assessment, iReady Online Assessment, My On (Personalized Reading Program), Wonders Reading Program- Units Exams, and MOSL Periodic Math Assessment, and The Five Practices of Orchestration of Mathematics Discussions. Assessments derived from Qtel. Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment : January 2019, I Ready Online Assessment; February 2019, Wonders Assessments: Ongoing throughout the 2018/2019 academic school year . Reading Assessment, I Ready Online Assessment, My On (Personalized Reading Program), Wonders Reading Program- Units Exams F & P Reading Assessment : January/2019, I Ready Online Assessment; February 2017, Wonders Assessments: Ongoing throughout the 2018/2019 academic school year Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. See previous 5a. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In an effort to meet the instructional demands of CCLS aligned curriculum that thoroughly encompasses the instructional shifts, PS 28X has developed a schedule for conducting instructional visits. The school’s principal and assistant principals will support classroom teachers in differentiating instruction through the use of varying process, content and products to address the needs of their targeted population. Findings are shared with the staff through various forums throughout the year. Administrators will implement the Danielson Framework when conducting observations and debriefing with teachers. Administrative cabinet meetings will review teacher progress and develop supports which reflect the instructional needs. Administration will conduct frequent formative observations and provide feedback and professional development to support improved practice in identified competencies. Learning Walks will be used to collect low inference data that will support decision-making and as a way to monitor teacher progress at a grade and school level. The focus of the professional learning for school leaders will be on ensuring that instruction is consistently responsive to children’s’ development and needs, by creating experimental learning opportunities that are rigorous , interactive, and support student engagement. Feedback to teachers will be actionable and constructive. This will be measured by QR indicators 1.1, 1.2, and 4.1 as well as the Danielson Indicators 3B, and 3C, and 3D. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the observation process, the administration will work with teachers on moving from one competency level to the next, based on the Danielson Framework .Supporting this work will be instructional specialist from the District Instructional team. Additionally, our school’s UFT Teacher Center will be utilized to strategically work with teachers in matters pertaining to the improvement of their pedagogical skills. School leaders will attend professional learning endeavors that speak to the elements inherent to P.R.I.D.E., and the elements of actionable feedback that focus on the improvement of teacher practice. This will allow administrators to 2018-19 CEP 25  guide their pedagogical staff in creating rigorous and experiential learning experiences that engage the needs of all learners. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be supported to meet the challenging academic content by meeting the expectations as set by their goals, student goals, and the school’s instructional focus. All teachers and service providers Sept 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, coaches, Teacher Center, Administration will evaluate teachers based on components of Danielson Framework. All teachers Administrators will assist teachers with developing an understanding of questioning and discussion techniques and how to facilitate positive classroom discourse; which will then bring about higher degrees of trust between teacher and students, and also student to student relations.. All teachers and service providers District support specialist will provide for targeted PD as identified by teacher surveys and feedback All teachers Sept 2018 – June 2019 Sept 2018 – June 2019 Administrators Administrators September 2018– June 2019 District support specialist 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, our school will have received training in TCIS and SEL Strategies for creating a culturally enhanced learning environments that creates equity and access for all. By attending District wide events, families will be given opportunities to engage in learning opportunities, which will expose them to strategies which can support the social-emotional development of habits that leads to college and career readiness. This will be measured by a decrease in student behavioral incidences and smoother transitions for students exiting our elementary school and moving onto middle schools. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Danielson Framework, Go Math program, Developmental Reading Assessment Fountas and Pinnell, IReady, Teachers College Reading and Writing Program, Wonders Reading Program, DIBELS, Literacy Coaches, Data Specialist, Teacher Center, SMARTBoards, laptops, desktops, IPADS, classroom libraries, Experience Corps., ESL Teachers 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school’s wide mid-year assessment data (ELA) is due January 2019. The school cabinet will meet to analyze the student data trends. They will look for evidence to determine teacher professional development by analyzing student work samples, student assessments, and ELA test simulation data. Half of all teacher observations will be completed. Administrators will review the dashboard reports on Advance to determine next steps for teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid Year Assessment data in both Literacy and Math. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data collected by teachers of student performance on various benchmarks and other forms of assessments indicate the need to continue to build a strong learning environment that involves parents in the education of their children. Many of our parents are non-English speaking, from diverse cultures. We as a learning community need to give them the confidence and knowledge base to be able to assist their child/children academically at home. With this in mind there will be a series of parent workshops that are coherently focused to meet the academic and social needs in specific content areas of their child/children. We offer a welcoming and nurturing environment for parents whereas language will not be seen as a barrier. Additionally, by June 2019 our school will have received training in TCIS and SEL Strategies for creating a more culturally responsive learning environment, which supports equity and access to all. Parents will be provided opportunities to engage in learning strategies that can support the social-emotional environment and their academic learning needs of their children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 student proficiency will increase in ELA and Mathematics State Exam performance of level 3 by 3%, which will correlate to the increase in parental involvement; as evident by their attendance in school based and District level workshops.. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent workshops and trainings identified in order to deepen their knowledge base academically: Parents/ Caregivers Sept.2018-June 2019 Borough Field ELL Support Specialist, ● Literacy CAFÉ ● Common Core Learning Standards (  NYSESLAT  SIOP Model Monthly newsletters backpacked Open House Parent/Teacher Conferences with Bilingual Support Monthly “Breakfast with the Principal” (Informational Session) School Administration Parent Coordinator, ELA Coaches, UFT Teacher, IEP Teacher Parents/Caregivers Sept.2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Data Specialist, School Administrative Team, Parent Coordinator, Coaches, UFT Teacher Center, IEP Teacher Family Night with Bilingual Activities/Supports Family Night with Bilingual Activities/Supports Parents/ Sept.2018-June 2019 Administrative Team Caregivers 2018-19 CEP 30  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  TCIS SEL   Montefiore Medical Center  Professional Development opportunities provided by school guidance counselors  Workshops facilitated by the school’s Parent Coordinator  Workshops facilitated by Girls and Guys Empowerment Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Administration and Staff, CFN; ELL Support Specialists, schedule adjustments, instructional resources in ELA and Math. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The parent coordinator will check the attendance sign-in sheets for workshops to determine how many parents are attending. If attendance falls below our targeted goals, she will reach out to parents via newsletters and phone calls. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. See previous Part 5a Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Tier III One year below grade level Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Fundations Program Small Group During School Day Edmark One to One Explode the Code ELA Academy After School Academy I Ready Online Assessment Smart board Resources Go Math Mathematics Tier III Small Group During School Day One year below grade level Program/Tiered & Intensive Support One to One After School Academy Math Academy I Ready Online Assessment Waterford Online Assessment Smart Board Resources Science Tier III McGraw-Hill Program Small Group During School Day 2018-19 CEP 32  One year below grade level Smart board Resources One to One Social Studies Tier III McGraw-Hill Program Small Group During School Day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) One year below grade level Smart board Resources Any behavior that interrupts another student’s academics Counseling and Mental Health Services Emotional Trauma One to One Small Group During School Day One to One After-School Hours Montefiore Clinic- Sessions/Outside Referral to Mental Health Clinic 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) As of 6/28/17, there are 186 students in Temporary Housing that are currently attending The Mt. Hope Centennial School – P.S. 28X 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. For the 2016/2017 academic school year, the following services will be offered:  Afternoon tutorial  Morning guidance counseling   Parents will be invited to participate in wokshops that will speak to discovering ways of improving their child’s Student give always during the holiday season (this is usually sponsored by Congressman Richie Torres) academic performance. Students will participate in a partnership with the N.Y.C Public Library which will allow for them to receive additional reading material that will support their classroom learnings. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2018-19 CEP 34 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1-The P.S. 28 hiring committee will recruit new teachers from career fairs and colleges. 2-Teachers will be given multiple professional development opportunities to meet areas of improvement. 3-Coaches and Teacher Center Staff will provide support and professional development for all staff members. 4-Teachers will be given multiple opportunities to attend professional development outside the school, including professional development provided by New York City and the Bronx Regional Support Team. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development: Danielson Framework Workstations Assessments Special Education Compliance New Teacher PD Technology Development and Planning Curriculum/Lesson Planning P.R.I.D.E. 2018-19 CEP 36  SEL TCIS Having students be part of addressing existing problems or needs within the classroom Having teachers define what outcomes they most value as educators. Creating checklists for assessment to produce learning Creating a blueprint that can assist teachers in designing a performance task Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. All mentors will be required to use a variety of strategies and September 2018 - June resources to respond to their teacher;’s professional needs and to 2019 the diverse learning needs of all students. All mentors will utilize their knowledge of the Danielson September 2018 - June framework and the common core standards to advance the instructional practices of new teachers. 2019 School administration and selected mentors School administrators and selected mentors All first and second year teachers All first and second year teachers All members of the school’s instructional staff First, second and third year teachers September 2018 - June 2019 School administration and selected mentors September 2018 - June 2019 School administrators and selected mentors School administration, literacy coaches, and the school’s PD team will design and facilitate professional learning opportunities that is aligned with standards, the school’s CEP, and staff feedback from previously conducted PD opportunities. All mentors will develop newly hired first, second and third year teacher’s abilities to self assess and co-assess practice based on evidence, to set professional goals, and monitor progress. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). School’s PD plan will take into account the needs of early-career teachers  Additional planning time will be given to both mentor and their teacher(s)  Teacher’s schedules will allow for meeting with mentors   The school will work with the Borough to ensure that budget lines are placed for mentor release  All year 1, 2, and 3 teachers will be mentored by NTC-trained mentors  Mentors will not be pulled for coverages, or given so many roles in the building that thy cannot meet with teachers.  Mentors will participate in all days of NTC training. 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parent Orientation Pre-screening Open House Events Newsletters One on One conference Early Intervention Creating structures for children that are transitioning from early childhood programs to elementary school by including social/emotional supports and strategies to engage/educate parents so that they can help prepare their child for moving up to elementary school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Assessments: Fountas and Pinnell Assessments Dibels I Ready Online Assessments MyOn Personalized Reading Program Creating structures that will allow for teachers to become involved in the decision making process regarding the use and selection of multiple assessment measures. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 38  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 174,109.00 29,646.00 TBD 4,425,939.00 X X X X X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) All goals All goals English Language Learner goals English Language Learner goals All goals 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 CEP 39   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 28X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 28X will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 42   schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 28X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 43  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our English Language Learners (ELLs) account for 33% of our overall student population. There are currently 247 students receiving ELL services. P.S. 28 offers the option of Transitional Bilingual Education in grades K-5 for students whose first language is Spanish, as well as Freestanding ESL instruction, based on parent choice. Through data analysis of our 2016 NYSESLAT scores, teachers and administrators identified writing as an area in need of improvement. This was the trend school wide. In addition, when comparing ELA and NYSESLAT scores, 100% of our advanced level students scored a Level 1 or 2 on the ELA exam. See Chart 1 below. Based on the analysis of this data, we have identified writing as the focus for our Title III Supplemental Program. Chart 1 PS 28 MOUNT HOPE NYSESLAT: Entering Emerging Transitioning Expanding Commanding NYS TEST 1 3 4 6 9 12 2 2 14 16 9 0 3 3 15 10 5 1 4 2 5 17 13 0 5 3 17 8 12 5 NYS TEST Lv. 1 Lvl. 2 Lvl. 3 Lvl. 4 3 43 35 20 2 4 44 47 20 10 5 46 29 20 8 All ELLs, including newcomers and immigrants, SIFE students, Long-Term ELLs, and Special Education ELLs from grades K - 5 are invited to attend our ELL Academies. The Academies will begin in November 2016 and will continue until April 2017 for a total of 19 sessions. We will have two separate academies for our ELLs: A Writing Through Drama Academy for grades K-2 and a Writing Academy to service grades 3-5. Students will be grouped by grade and proficiency level with a total of 12 groups for both academies. The Early Childhood Academy will consist of five groups: two groups in Kindergarten (with two certified ESL teachers), one group in first grade (with one bilingual certified teacher), and two groups in second grade (with two bilingual certified teachers). The grades 3-5 Academy will also consist of five groups: two groups in third grade (with two bilingual certified teachers), one group in fourth grade (with 1 bilingual certified teacher), and two groups in fifth grade (with 2 bilingual certified teachers). The language of instruction for both academies will be English. Our Title III ELL Academy for K-2 will take place after school hours on Thursdays from 2:20 – 4:20 pm. It will be a total of 19 sessions with the Bronx Arts Ensemble. Bronx Arts Ensemble is an arts residency that addresses the Common Core Anchor Standards for writing through the 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information lens of physical theater. Research shows that total physical response (TPR), role play, and kinesthetic learning are best practices for ELLs when acquiring a new language. This approach of "physicalizing language" will be used as a scaffold to further develop the writing skills of our ELLs in the early childhood grades. The text used for this academy is NY ELLs by Finishline. Our Title III ELL Academy servicing grades K and 2nd/3rd Grade (students with entering through transitioning language levels in English) will take place on Saturdays from 9:00 am - 12:00 pm. It will be a total of 19 sessions with a focus on the writing process, using the workshop model. Through this academy, ELL students in grades K and 2nd/3rd Grade will receive a total of 3 extra hours of ESL/ELA instruction per week. In addition, all of our grade 3-5 ELL students, including former ELLs, will be invited to participate in our ELA and Math After- School Programs, at no cost to Title III. The supplemental materials used for this program are which are Getting Ready for NYSESLAT instruction. Records, including student attendance and parents' preferred language will be kept in the ELL Binder housed in the ELL room. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Arts Bronx Ensemble will provide professional development to all K-2 ELL Academy teachers in using drama techniques to enhance student writing. In addition, this professional development will include strategies on building community in the classroom as students learn to write and choreograph in collaboration with their peers. This session will take place on Thursday, November 10, 2016 (2:20 - 4:20 pm) for a total of two hours one week prior to the start of the Early Childhood Academy (Friday, November 18- Thursday, April 14, 2017). This component will be at a cost to the program. ELL Academy teachers of grades 3-5 have met with administration and coaches to analyze the NYSESLAT and ELA data from the 2015-2016 year .Literacy coach, ELL Administrator, and ENL Teacher will provide professional development on best practices for the teaching of writing to ELL students. These sessions will be ongoing during after-school hours. In addition, the ELL Administrator and ENL Teacher will provide professional development on using SIOP interaction strategies to improve student writing. This PD session will take place on Thursday, November 10th from 2:20-4:20 pm. Teachers will also receive professional development on informational writing by Literacy Coach. Teachers of the grades 3-5 ELL Academy will also attend professional development in the area of writing. This will be of cost to the program. Records including agendas and attendance sheets will be kept in ELL Binder housed in the ELL room. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Adult ESL Programs are designed to help immigrants and others who have not yet developed proficiency in English to acquire the basic knowledge and skills they need to function effectively as parents, workers, and citizens. Due to the large ELL population in our school, many parents of our students have limited English proficiency. With this in mind, we will offer adult ESL classes. These classes will be held on Saturday mornings from 9:00-12:00 pm. Each class will last for three hours and a total of 19 sessions will be offered. Ms. Velez, a certified bilingual teacher, will be the instructor for this program. An invitation will be sent to all P.S. 28 parents in the both the home language of Spanish and English. This program will also be offered to all community members and postings will be placed throughout the community. These records including attendance sheets and agendas will be kept in the ELL Binder within the ELL room. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 50 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Mount Hope Centennial School Borough Bronx School Number 028 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Stephen Beckles Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher ENL Teacher: Jacquelyn Cianci Teacher/Subject Area Bilingual Teacher: Lucy Rivera Teacher/Subject Area ENL Teacher: Eileen Bresnan Related-Service Provider Superintendent Leticia Rodriquez- Rosario Assistant Principal George Prisco, Lissette Alba, Coach School Counselor Nancy Ramos Parent Johanna Camacho Parent Coordinator Aniya Abuawadeh Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 5 2 4 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 5 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 52  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 736 Total number of ELLs 212 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 28.80% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 1 0 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 1 1 0 1 4 1 0 1 3 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 7 0 0 0 0 0 7 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the DRA (English and Spanish) to assess reading engagement, oral reading fluency, and comprehension of texts. We also use i-Ready, an interactive online diagnostic and instructional program to assess students at the beginning of the year and identify content areas of strength and weakness. These diagnostics (DRA & I-Ready) provide information about the students as readers (reading preferences and habits, phonological & decoding skills, oral fluency, comprehension abilities), as well as their skills in reading and math. The teachers use this data to group students based on reading and math levels, reading behaviors, and skills, and helps the school to identify students in need of further support. Teachers reassess students at least every 6 weeks; grouping is flexible and constantly changing. Native Language is assessed using the Maravillas Benchmark Assessment in grades K-2. This assessment is a diagnostic to test 2018-19 CEP 53  for foundational skills in Spanish, and is intended as a Spanish intervention instructional program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? There are weekly and monthly meetings to support this endeavor. These meetings are facilitated by ENL personnel and Administration. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ELL program is evaluated by looking at both formative and summative assessments as well as student work portfolios and reading logs. These assessments allow are teachers teams to analyze student work, create progress monitoring checks, rigorous tasks, and units of study. • NYSESLAT Exam Data/ State Examination Data (ELA 3-5, Math 3-5, Science 4, NYSESLAT comparison) • In-House Baseline, Midline, Endline Data K-5 (Reading, Writing, Math, Social Studies, Science) • Unit Assessments (Criteria/Rubrics) o Writing Benchmarks o Math (Pre/Post, Progress Checks, H.O.T/Extended Response) o Waterford/IReady Online Assessment DIBELS Data 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have specific RTI personnel for each of the grades that address classroom and assessment breakdown of the data within the content strands. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Within the classroom, teachers are using assessment data to provide small group instruction based on students' needs. Students who are not making adequate progress within the classroom are referred to Tier II intervention and receive further support from RTI teachers. Our school engages in four steps to help our ELLs become successful students. The first step for incoming students is to provide an assessment to determine language proficiency. Once the data is gathered and analyzed, we determine whether or not if the student is in risk of academic intervention. The students receive academic intervention in the classroom environment, supported by coaches. Along with the daily academic studies, the students attend a Saturday Academy, in which they follow a specific program based on their needs and academic levels. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSELAT data/Maravillas Benchmark Data 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? There are specific ELL and Bilingual teacher meetings that take place to support student instructional meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 54  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We also offer a free standing ENL pull-out program. The pull-out ENL program is taught by certified ENL teacher. These students receive ENL services to meet the requirements as per CR Part 154. b. TBE program. If applicable. All of our bilingual classes, are taught by certified bilingual teachers. Our bilingual students are grouped by grade level. All teachers participate in the Literacy Wonders program. These include oral language development, reading and writing workshop and word study in NLA and ELA. Students will also engage in a computer based program called I- Ready that targets reading and math. In the reading component the program helps students develop comprehension, letter fluency , phonics. In math the focus is on number sentences, word problems, number identification which is common core aligned skill based lessons. Small group instruction (SGI) provided by the classroom teacher is strategic and flexible. SGI is driven by ongoing assessment data, targets student's needs, and includes various ENL strategies. Our bilingual classes develop the Spanish language through Native Language Arts instruction. Our Mathematics program is Go Math, which is taught in Spanish. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? There will be four ENL teachers that provide the mandated amount of minutes either as a push or pull out model. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. One of the programs used in ENL is the computer based program iReady/Waterford program. iReady/Waterford Program is built specifically to address Common Core State Standards. Students are introduced to a diverse array of critical content. The program features activities designed to help students broaden their foundational, language and speaking/ listening skills, while interacting with a variety of informational and literary texts. Students are exposed to literature and direct instruction in reading, speaking and listening skills. In this program students are exposed to and acquire new vocabulary that they will encounter in language arts, science, math, and social studies. TBE Students also receive instruction in their native language within the Math curriculum Go Math but the ENL students have the curriculum done in English. TBE and ENL students receive Science and Social Studies through the Wonders Literacy program. For the 2017-2018, Social Studies units provided by the city for grades K-5. We will also have a Social Studies Cluster for the various grades to provide further support within this area. For Science, we have two Science clusters that prepare and further expand the content learning to master the NYS Science performance/content exam. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When a child is entering the NYC school system for the first time the home language survey is completed. If it is determined that the child speaks another language besides English, we begin assessment with an Interview and by administering the 2018-19 CEP 55  NYSITELL. If the students home language is Spanish, the student will also be assessed with the Spanish LAB . During the school year student's progress will be monitored using running records (DRA), student work, portfolio review, and teacher observation. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. N/A B. Newcomers (0-3 years/Bilingual): New arrivals to the country are welcomed and given classroom buddies. They are screened in both English and Spanish. The proficiency in each language is examined and an educational plan is developed. The RTI Team assists in this process. AIS services in literacy and mathematics are provided by Title I to support our new arrivals as well as our students who are considered long term ELL’s. An orientation for parents of the newly registered Bilingual kindergarten students takes place in August/September each year. The parents and students come to the school to meet the teacher and have the opportunity to familiarize themselves with the building, the classroom, and the curriculum. The Principal and the Parent Coordinator, along with teachers, organize this very successful event. For all new arrivals there is a focus on interventions that assist them in developing reading skills to prevent these children from becoming long-term ELLs. iReady is used in the second grader for Entering, Emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding ELLs. Imagine Learning is an interactive program used to strengthen literacy skills. iReady provides students with the skills to build listening and speaking skills, as well as vocabulary development. Selected students also have the opportunity to work on an additional technology based program called Waterford. This program is used to develop language, literacy, and content knowledge to build on academic growth. Long-Term ELLs 4-6 years Students who are Long Term ELL’s receive a variety of services to support their learning. IReady/MyOn online assessments is used to develop fluency and comprehension, review and acquire new vocabulary in all content areas. Student selection for these AIS groups is based on a variety of data sources. Some of the data sources include: standardized exams (LAB R, NYSESLAT, Ell predictives, ELA, and ELE), portfolio review and teacher conference notes. The language of instruction varies according to the group being serviced by providers who are proficient in both languages. Students also receive additional support during the Literacy block with the ENL teachers. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? During the school day students engage in a variety of instructional strategies across content areas, to develop both communicative and academic proficiency in English. Students engage in guided reading groups, reciprocal teaching, accountable talk, and activities which revolve language development (SIOP/CAFÉ strategies) within the Literacy Wonders program materials. 2018-19 CEP 56  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Based on baseline and ongoing assessment data we identify students strengths, needs and next steps allowing us to create individual instructional plans that target students diverse needs by building on their strengths and interests. Some of our ELL’s receive mandated support services as stated on their IEP’s. These mandated services may include class assignments to a monolingual class with ENL services; SETTS ( push in/ pull out); Bilingual Speech Services; and/or Bilingual Guidance Services. Our teachers receive professional development in ENL and Special Education. Teachers are also encouraged to speak to our Response to Intervention Team when they have concerns about students social and academic progress. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Certified ENL teachers push into classrooms on a daily basis to provide our students with the required services. The ENL teacher plans with the classroom teacher and follows the same curriculum which is being taught. Instructional strategies such as scaffolding and cooperative learning groups are designed to meet the needs of our population. This also includes individual and small group conferencing in all content areas. Teachers work with our instructional coaches in the various content areas to incorporate different strategies that will help make material more comprehensible for our ELL students. Students are able to work in small groups, strategy groups, use technology-based programs and academies. Students engage in various activities to develop their ability to make predictions, draw conclusions, identify main idea and supporting details, and develop other areas of comprehension. Students are also encouraged to use manipulatives , materials and tools in the classroom and strategies learned. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will start implementing the Literacy program titled "Wonders" for our monolingual students and "Maravillas" for our K-2 bilingual students during the 2017-2018 school year. This program will offer instruction specifically designed to create learning experiences that inspire confidence, increase student engagement, and build language skills. Lessons emphasize building speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills to improve both academic and social language and accelerate progress in the core classroom. All instruction connects with core Wonders content, providing a seamless pathway for students to access content at their proficiency level, build understanding, and engage in the core classroom. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not have any programs that will be discontinued for this school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The ELL students are afforded equal access to all school programs. All student placement is determined based on their needs and strengths. Students are given the opportunity to work in one or more programs including before and after-school academies such as small group instruction, NYSESLAT practice, Waterford and iReady, that will help students overcome obstacles and give them tools and strategies that they will need to become more successful. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ELL students also receive additional support by using classroom materials such as mentor texts, textbooks, English/Spanish/picture dictionaries, thesaurus, supplementary materials that are level appropriate for students, computer software programs, Smart Board accessibility, Waterford and iReady. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 57  Native Language support is delivered according to CR-Part 154 requirements in conjunction with tools and strategies previously mentioned. Students also have access to Literature in their Native Language and glossaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ELL/ENL services and resources correspond to student's academic levels, needs, age and grade-level. The ENL teachers meets with classroom teachers and support service personnel to monitor students progress and make changes to programs and/or interventions if needed. Our ELLs also receive supplemental resources that are grade and age appropriate to make content more comprehensible and meaningful. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All ELL students also receive additional support by using classroom materials such as mentor texts, textbooks, English/Spanish/picture dictionaries, thesaurus, supplementary materials that are level appropriate for students, computer software programs, Smart Board accessibility, Imagine Learning, Waterford and iReady. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly enrolled ELLs have the opportunity to visit and familiarize themselves with our school before the beginning of the school year. All parents will have the opportunity to visit classrooms and other school facilities. Parents of new students entering kindergarten have the opportunity to attend our kindergarten Parent Orientation. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers will attend professional development pertaining to educating ELL/ENL students. Professional Development for all ELL personnel will be offered at our school to meet the New CR Part 154 requirements. Professional development will be provided by our literacy/social studies and math/science instructional coaches, by our consultants, through participation in workshops, in other venues and through turn-key sessions presented by Bilingual/ENL staff members and consultants. 2018-19 CEP 58  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As students proficiency develops, the scaffolds available change to ensure academic success while promoting independence and confidence in preparing them for middle school. Professional development is provided to the staff every Monday. Also throughout the school year teachers will be given the opportunity to attend other workshops regarding ENL. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Throughout the school year, parents of all ELL students are sent progress reports outlining their child’s academic and language development. End of unit assessments and culminating writing assessments are analyzed and next steps are generated. Parents are notified and invited to meet with teachers on Tuesdays during our schools parent outreach time. At these meetings, teachers discuss recent assessment results and reinforce various ways the parent can continue to support their child at home both socially and academically. Translators are provided and are present during the meeting with the parent and teacher. Parents are also offered after school workshops once a month where they can come to school and learn about a variety of topics ranging from how to support their child emotionally, how to encourage the use of the New language at home, goal setting, technology, nutrition, Asthma, children’s literature, homework help, online resources, available community resources, test sophistication units, test support, and math/reading strategies to assist their child’s learning. An ENL Program for adults is also facilitated by our Parent Coordinator and ENL Teacher. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. During the school year we have many meetings, conferences, parent/ student/ teacher evenings to engage and collaborate with families. Some of the events that occur in our building are: * ELL Parent Orientation * Back to School Night * Grade Newsletters * Parent Association Meetings * Parent ENL Classes * Phonemic Awareness/Literacy Workshops Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Stephen Beckles, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 28x School DBN: 09x028 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) S. Beckles L. Alba Title Principal Assistant Principal A. Abuawadeh Parent Coordinator J. Bourdon/E. Bresnan/R. Uceta ENL/Bilingual Teacher R. Odinga Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach N. Ramos/D. Daley School Counselor L. Rodriquez-Rosario Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 06/29/17 06/29/17 06/29/17 9 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09x028 School Name: PS 28x Superintendent: Leticia Rodriqu The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lissette Jacqueline Eileen Alba Cianci Bresnan A.P. ESL Teacher ESL Teacher No No Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Language preferences are done within the HLIS and emergency contact cards. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 63  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Afrikaans English Spanish Mandigo 2 473 497 7 0.2% 48.02% 50.46% 0.71 % 2 468 502 7 0.2 47.51% 50.96% 0.71% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Hausa, Italian, Mandigo, Mossi, Twi Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School Calendar 09/16-06/17 Translated by AP Alba Parent Teacher Announcements 09/16-06/17 SLT & PTA Parent Letters 09/16-06/17 Testing Information Parent Letters 09/16-06/17 Translated by AP Alba Translated by AP Alba Translated by AP Alba 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences 09/16-06/17 Curriculum Night 09/16-06/17 School Family Letters 09/16-06/17 interpretation service(s)? Translated by AP Alba/Family Worker/Attendance Teacher/Social Worker Translated by AP Alba/Family Worker/Attendance Teacher/Social Worker Translated by AP Alba/Family Worker/Attendance Teacher/Social Worker 2018-19 CEP 64  Guidance Counselor Calls 09/16-06/17 Translated by AP Alba/Family Worker/Attendance Teacher/Social Worker 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. This will be done through AP Alba, Guidance Counselor Ramos, and Attendance/Family Worker/Social Worker Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. This will be done through AP Alba, Guidance Counselor Ramos, and Attendance/Family Worker. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) This will be done through AP Alba, Guidance Counselor Ramos, and Attendance/Family Worker/Social Worker Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Survey Parent Teacher Conference Feedback 2018-19 CEP 65 
