2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X046 School Name: P.S. 046 EDGAR ALLAN POE Principal: JENNIFER ALEXANDER-ADE 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Edgar Allan Poe Literacy Development School 321000010046 K - 5 School Number (DBN): 10X046 279 East 196 th Street, Bronx, NY 10458 (718) 584 - 4450 718-584-7402 Phone Number: Jessica Rivera Fax: Email Address: Jrivera102@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jennifer Alexander-Ade Matt Carioscia Jose SilvestreSanchez Alysia Harris AnorkaAndrea DelgadilloPena N/A N/A N/A District Information MaribelHulla Superintendent: One Fordham Plaza, Room 836, Bronx NY 10458 mhulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)741-5852 Phone Number: 718)741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Bronx District 10 FSC: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: Fax: (718) 741-8895 (718) 828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Jennifer Alexander-Ade Kimberly Hamburg Jose SilvestreSanchez IraidaRodriguez AnorkaAndrea DelgadilloPena N/A N/A N/A Alysia Harris Linda Dellabadia Pauline Murray Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Karen Ramirez Diane Harrigan-Hubbard Leticia Martinez EvelinMartinez KattiaDe Leon Minerva Mendoza BetzaidaGarcia Jessel Maldonado Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our PS46 school mission states: The Edgar Allan Poe Literacy Development School Community values and respects the culture, home language and family traditions of our students. As educators, parents, students, and community members, we are committed to work as partners to guide our students to become high-level readers, writers and critical thinkers and to ensure that all students are on their way to being college and career ready. We believe that all children will achieve high performance standards in a nurturing, safe and risk-free learning environment which supports differentiated classroom instruction in a sequential rigorous curriculum, enhanced by the integration of the arts and technology. This mission guides all of our decisions for our school community! 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. One of our strengths is our nurturing environment; we attribute this to our implementation of Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) which we follow to fidelity. During a recent Quality Review, the reviewer noted our supportive learning environment as an area of celebration. A PBIS team, of the principal, assistant principal, dean, guidance counselor, and 2 classroom teachers, meet weekly to review the data of all student occurrences, to review patterns, and implement school wide systems to improve our environment. A few changes that have come about via the team are implementing breakfast and lunch clubs, creating office discipline referral forms with follow-up notes, weekly PBIS notice in the staff newsletter, and monthly celebrations that include celebrating the students and staff. Our Social Emotional Intervention Team (SEIT) and Response to Intervention Team (RtI) meet weekly to develop plans to address student academic and personal behaviors. The SEIT is spearheaded by our full time Social Worker. We ensure that families in crisis receive supports via our partnerships with New York Foundling Hospital, Visiting Nurse Services and other community based organizations that we have an established relationship. A USDE turn around principle that has been implemented for the 2018-2019 school year is the modification of our literacy instructional program with the very successful Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP). This partnership with TCRWP will expand on the work that we already have in place, with the workshop model approach to teaching. The workshop model builds on student strengths, and TCRWP is a structured research based approach to improve the Reading and Writing of our students. School leaders have also implemented a cycle of observation rounds using the Danielson Framework Rubric. We meet across mini schools to observe a teachers practice discuss findings, and norm our ratings for the lesson, and then draft feedback for improved teacher practice. Our walkthrough protocols include using a "Checklist of Best Practice" focusing on student group work routines and designated discussion protocols. The data gathered from this extra lens would then be shared with the staff member in written feedback. PS 46 has strategic collaborations with a few partnerships. We have successfully partnered with Dreamyard for poetry writing and spoken word performances for more than 10 years. This past school year our PS 46 students were the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  Bronx Gold Champions against many other schools in the Bronx. We also partner with other Arts residencies such as Art Horizons, Marquis Studios, and Dancing Classrooms, to bring music, dance, and theater to our classrooms. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 46 has 2 special student populations, SWD and ELLs. Specific needs include small group targeted instruction, differentiation, and scaffolded intervention whenever possible. We are closely reviewing student IEPs in the School Implementation Team (SIT) to ensure that the goals for SWD reflect where the students are currently and are rigorous and attainable. The SIT is also monitoring that student goals on the IEPs reflect the Present Levels of Performance (PLOP). We know that this extra effort will ensure that our students are in the least restrictive environment with expectations for student learning and engagement that reflect grade level standards. Our ELL students benefit from the co-teaching model that we use with our certified ELL teachers and the classroom teacher. An additional ELL teacher was added to the staff to insure that all of our ELL students' needs are met. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. An element of the Framework for Great Schools that we’ve made the most growth in is "Collaborative Teachers". This element is aligned to Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions. We are most proud of our collaborative teaching community, it has been re- energized with all of our teachers in grade teams. Our teachers meet weekly for professional learning (PL). During this time we follow a collaborative protocol with an emphasis on the “Inquiry Model Approach” for reviewing data and identifying areas of focus. The teachers then select a target population and create assessments and refine an instructional strategy or plan to implement. The teachers come together, after a few weeks of implementing the strategies, to analyze and assess their findings for next steps, lessons, and/ or curriculum changes. Teachers have also volunteered to facilitate professional learning, giving the staff a “Menu” of options. We call these PL sessions Menu-Mondays. During this time teachers share their expertise on Smart-boards, lesson planning, grant writing, classroom behavior management, and a host of other ideas. Our PL also includes department meetings. During this time teachers meet across grades by department. All of our PL and team meetings have an over-arching Professional Learning message which is: PS46 is a Professional Learning Community that strives to improve our students’ social, emotional, and academic achievements. Our knowledge of students is deepened through a partnership with the parents and the close examination of various sources of data which enables us to address our students’ needs. In order to improve student outcomes, we will focus on effective questioning and student to student discussions with an emphasis on our ELL population. Rigorous Instruction, is an element of the Framework for Great Schools which reflects a priority need which will constitute an area of focus during the 2018-2019 school year. We will monitor our teacher's instructional practices and give feedback regarding teacher questioning, student engagement, and student discourse. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. The USDE Turn Around Principle that we will focus on this 2018-2019 school year, is the modification of the instructional program with the implementation of Teacher's College Reading and Writing Curriculum. It is an evidence based, rigorous curriculum, that is aligned with State academic standards. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X046 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 921 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 138 138 41 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 69 50 41 41 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 91.0% % Reduced Lunch 39.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 81.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.86 3% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 22.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 61% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 97 98 41 91.1% 0.7% 23.6% 12.7% 2.2% 0.8% 10 13% 9.4 21.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Area of strength: The school has a core group of teacher representatives to work with Teacher's College and the school’s Literacy Coaches and or staff developer, to write and develop the school’s Common Core Learning Standards aligned ELA curriculum units based on Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project. (SOP 3.2) Direct coaching with a Teacher's College Consultant Coach (SOP 3.2) Reading Assessment Pacing Calendars (SOP 3.2) RAZ Kids Common Core aligned instructional software for grades K-5 (SOP 3.2) myOn Online Library Access aligned instructional software for grades K-5 (SOP 3.2) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  The Literacy Coaches offers ongoing forums, whereby teachers have opportunities to discuss and engage in frequent, continuous, and increasingly concrete and precise talk about teaching practice. (SOP 3.2) PS 46 has a UFT Teacher Center Site and Specialist. The UFT Teacher Center Specialist attends monthly conferences and shares the information gained with the Instructional Team Leaders, teachers and paraprofessionals. (SOP 3.2) Through the UFT Teacher Center Professional Development Institutes and Citywide Conferences our teachers are offered various learning opportunities to further develop their practice. Once completed, they turnkey the information to the rest of the staff. (SOP 3.2) Through the use of NTC tools mentor coaches support new teachers by providing on-going classroom support, low inference observations tied to the Danielson Framework, and feedback. (SOP 3.2) The Literacy Coaches, Literacy Consultant and administrators, guide teachers in nurturing high-order thinking skills, and provide challenging and stimulating work for the students. In order to foster high order thinking (HOT), the teachers at PS 46 are planning for the following components: team talk, close reading, guided and reciprocal reading behaviors, developing questions, inquiring about questions through research, annotating and analyzing texts, responding to text-dependent questions, writing for various audiences using explicit craft, and articulating understanding and processes of learning. (SOP 3.3) Through a collaborative effort, school leaders, coaches, and teachers ensure that students are provided with multiple opportunities to access Raz-Kids, Award Reading, Class Dojo, and the PS 46 Library Media Center and Virtual Library, Renzulli Learning, I-Ready Teacher Toolbox to enrich learning. Smartboards, laptops, and Mini I-pads are used daily. In addition, the following residencies are in place for this school year: Song-writing, African Dance, Ballroom Dancing, and Poetry Slam. (SOP 3.4) Collaborative problem solving sessions are held after school with vertical and grade level team meetings, focused on analyzing student work and using the “Looking At Student Work” Protocol (LASW). The primary emphasis is to examine student work for students’ strengths, needs and next steps to inform instruction. (SOP 3.5) Priority Needs: Continued coaching by TC Consultant to improve teacher implementation of lessons and lesson design to ensure gradual release of responsibility focusing on class instruction, so that the lessons are less teacher dominated. (SOP 3.2) The "Gradual release of responsibility" means that teachers will plan lessons with the "I do. We do. You do" format. This will ensure that students are engaged and not passively watching the teacher. We came to the conclusion that this is a priority need from the feedback that we received from our QR in June 2017, our PPO visit in January 2018, and ongoing informal observations during the 2017-2018 school year, where it was noted that more student independence was needed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  By June 2019, 100% of all teachers will participate in professional learning teams in the use of the Mastery Connect tool to develop and monitor questioning and formative assessments of all students with a focus on the SWD and ELLs subgroups, and a promotion on college and career readiness. This will be evident by a 10% increase of SWD and ELLs meeting benchmarks on the New York State ELA exam. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Grade Level Teacher leaders, coaches, Staff Developer, Universal Literacy Reading Coach, Assessment Matters Consultant, Teacher's College Coaches, and Assistant Principals Benchmarks will be set by September 14, 2018 All students K-5 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, AIS teachers, coaches, Math Specialist teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Curriculum team embeds modeled tiered questions to guide teachers in developing Depth of Knowledge (DOK) / HOT in lesson plans to challenge all levels of student abilities All students K-5 Sept. 2018- June 2019 All teachers will participate in professional development workshops that focus on best practices and lesson implementation Reciprocal Reading, Guided Reading, and student Group Work protocols. All teachers will participate with the Master Connect tools to monitor progress towards standards and goals with grade-wide formative assessments. Differentiated Programs such as: ● AIS provided by classroom teacher and grade reduction specialists ● Reading A to Z, online individualized program increase reading abilities in comprehension, fluency, vocabulary and phonemic awareness. Strategies that will be used to address the needs of students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high-need student groups include differentiation by, process, product or content. Providing multiple points of entry to read and understand complex text. Embedding the use of technology to address a variety of learning needs. Instructional practices that address student modalities such as visual, tactile, kinesthetic, etc. Explicitly teaching Tier II academic vocabulary as evidenced by the vocabulary wall. The use of SIOP model to ensure that teachers contrast lesson with both language and content objectives 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  Two NY Ready ELA State Exam simulations The school will ensure this action is implemented through the use of data tracking. The school wide assessment calendar and curriculum pacing calendars embed interim assessments that school leaders and teachers analyze to determine the effectiveness of instruction and the impact on student learning. Team teachers meet weekly to examine student work and create instructional plans that address the needs of targeted populations by grade. Administrators regularly visit classrooms to ensure that instruction is effective and follows the CCLS aligned curriculum. Teachers are provided with timely feedback to improve the quality of instruction. Additionally, teachers attend professional learning workshops or engage in inter-visitations to explore best teaching practices. The Instructional Team Leaders (ITL) in addition to the Core Team (cabinet of administration) meet weekly to discuss trends across grade levels and with varying populations. These teams make key instructional decisions Families will be engaged and supported to understand rigorous instruction and the CCLS through the implementation of parent workshops. Coaches in both literacy and math conduct a parent meeting to introduce parents and families of students in grades 3-5 to the English Language Arts and Mathematics state exams. Additionally, teachers make use of the Tuesday Parent Engagement time to expose parents to the academic performance of their child in relationship to the standard as well as providing resources and helpful tips to support their children at home 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All students K-5 January 2019 and March 2019 Classroom teachers, AIS teachers, coaches, ELL Teachers, Staff Developer, and TC coaches All students K-5 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, AIS teachers, coaches, & Lead Teachers. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will participate in family workshops that will inform parents about rigorous instruction, common core standards, and school expectations in order to help their children at home. These workshops will be held 4 times per year by the coaches (September, December, January and March). The Parent coordinator will also be integral in informing parents for these workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Utilizing Title I Priority Focus Funds have been set aside to pay for : ● In-house and off-site professional development for Teacher Mentors ● AIS Teachers ● Consultant for teaching reading, guidance, with direct modeling, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  ● RAZ Kids individualized online books ● Calendar of learning opportunities via Teacher’s Center and Teacher's College ● Grade level teacher leaders to revise and update curriculum after school. ● Professional learning supports for Guided Reading and Running Record implementation Secretary to input data into “Dropbox” myOn Online Library Access Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Performance Based Assessment (PBA) tasks and end of unit Literacy assessments and Go Math Chapter Tests Professional Learning around areas of needs discovered via the PBA Weekly professional learning embedded in their classroom practice, coaching, co-teaching, inter-class visitations and modeling occurring as a routine part of the Readers’/Writers’ workshop, Collaboratively problem-solving sessions (Professional Learning Communities) with teachers working together to discuss students’ assessment data Simulated ELA State exams (2 times per year for ELA) Analyzing student work to determine the areas of needs and trends for each student, class and grade. Data is collected electronically via Dropbox to track patterns within classes and grades. Administrators and coaches access this data to determine areas of strengths and needs to provide further support Classroom observations and actionable feedback from the Administration. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21 By February 2019, all classroom teachers will have administered the Teacher's College reading assessment as a mid-point benchmark, which will accurately predict progress towards achieving an increase of students' reading levels. At this benchmark we will see at least a 50% of the students have increased their reading levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Teacher's College MOSL Reading Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Areas of Strength 1.. Guidance Counselors will support students in Breakfast and Lunch Clubs in areas of self-esteem, doing your best, academic achievement and building social skills as well as personal coping skills. (SOP 5.3) 2. Additional resources will be provided through software and online activities that are linked to our curriculum map, including RAZ kids, IReady, AWARD Reading, and ST Math. (SOP 5.5) 3. Principal and staff will attend workshops offered by Teacher's College in improving strategies for the SWDs and ELLs. (SOP 5.2) 4. SWD Liaison will attend monthly meetings; ensure students are receiving supports and services. (SOP 5.2) 5. IEP teacher will monitor student IEP goals and annual reviews. (SOP 5.5) 6. Social Worker interns will work 1 on 1 with “At Risk” students to encourage, support, and monitor progress (SOP 5.3) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  7. Response to Intervention team will meet weekly to support teachers with “At Risk” students. (SOP 5.5) 8. Social-Emotional Intervention Team which includes the Principal, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principals, and Head Teachers will meet weekly to identify families in need of social services and connect them with community resources. (SOP 5.5) 9. During our safety meetings we review the school occurrences to monitor the various levels based on this information we modify and/or continue to implement preventative interventions. In addition, we practice tabletop scenarios to help us prepare for unforeseen situations (SOP 5.3) 10. Through our Positive Behavior Intervention & Supports (PBIS) we promote positive behavior through our PBIS Expectation Matrix that is posted within the classroom with our PBIS Star Behavior Board. In addition, through our monthly assemblies a short presentation (skit, video) is presented by the guidance counselors and the dean, through the monthly theme related to good character. (SOP 5.4). We also celebrate STAR students at our assemblies, present them with certificates, ribbons to wear all month and a pizza party celebration to follow. 11. Every Friday we have a drawing for students who have received good behavior tickets throughout the week and those whose names are drawn select a prize in the Main Office. 12. Direct coaching and feedback provided to the teachers from a PBIS Trainer. 13. Provisions, such as book bags, coats and school supplies are made to students in temporary housing. 14. The school day starts off with The Principal’s Principles, shared during morning announcements. Every day there is a different reminder of principles of good character. The staff and students recite the Pledge of Allegiance, along with the school pledge where they promise to be a S (Show respect) T (Treat others the way you’d like to be treated) A (Achieve excellence) R (Remember to be Responsible). Priority Needs 1. Celebrating student approximations to ideal positive behaviors with school wide events and prizes that include the parents. 2. Using the PBIS SWIS data to document and study incidences and determine patterns of behavior and establish structures to support the social and emotional development of high need students (SOP 5.5) 3. Introducing the language of regulating and expressing emotions beyond the initial vocabulary of "good, ok, and fine." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all classes will adopt the use of the “Mood Meter” which is an Anchor Tool of Emotional Intelligence from Yale University to improve student social and emotional health. Students will be able to recognize, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24 understand, label, express, and regulate their emotions. This will be evident by a 20% decrease of reports on the NYCDOE online occurrence reporting tool OORs. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Guidance Counselors and teachers will support students in Breakfast and Lunch Clubs in areas of self-esteem, doing your best, academic achievement and building social skills as well as personal coping skills. (SOP 5.3) Social-Emotional Intervention Team which includes the Principal, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, and Assistant Principals will meet weekly to identify families in need of social services and connect them with community resources. (SOP 5.5) Response to Intervention team will meet weekly to support teachers with “At Risk” students. (SOP 5.5) Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students who have difficulties with coping skills and too much stimuli. Students who are having difficulties coping successfully socially and emotionally Students who are not making adequate academic progress in their classrooms. Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Assistant Principals, SETSS teacher, Speech teacher, and IEP Teacher. Benchmark monitoring of student occurrences will be reviewed in February 2019 October 2018 through June 2019. Principal, Social Worker, Assistant Principals, Dean, and Guidance Team. Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Assistant Principals, SETSS teacher, Speech teacher, and IEP Teacher. Benchmark monitoring of students will take place every 6 weeks with a review of all outlined goals. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  We celebrate STAR students at our monthly assemblies, present them with certificates, ribbons to wear all month and a pizza party celebration to follow. Parents will be invited to the monthly celebrations. (SOP 5.4). October 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Dean, Guidance Team and Parents. For the students who have been STARs during the previous month. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive monthly newsletters that describe our environment and informs the parents of activities regarding environment and PBIS. They will be informed when their child is receiving awards and be invited to the monthly assemblies. A student bulletin board on each floor will be publicly displayed of the "Students of the Month" from each class for all families to see. The assistant principal and attendance teacher will be responsible for updating the bulletin boards on attendance and students of the months. the assistant principals will also invite the parents to the assemblies. The principal will send out the monthly newsletter. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Utilizing Title I Priority Focus Funds have been set aside to pay for: The breakfast and lunch clubs are facilitated by teachers; they are compensated for this time. There is a monthly adjustment to the schedule the first Monday of the month to facilitate the four assemblies that take place on that day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Lunch clubs are monitored by the teacher who is facilitating the group and s/he shares this progress with the student’s classroom teacher as well as administration. This progress monitoring occurs on a weekly basis. ● Students reviewed by SEIT are monitored on a rotation of six weeks, coordinated by our social worker and monitored by administration and the classroom teacher. ● Students reviewed by the Response to Intervention Team occurs every 4 to 5 weeks and is monitored by the Assistant Principal who facilitates these meetings, the assistant Principal who supervises the mini-school of the students and the student’s teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Social Worker will also monitor the parent Support group monthly, for needed resources such as outside family counseling. The instrument used to measure these improvements will be PBIS SWIS monitor, parent surveys, and the online occurrence reporting system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument used to measure these improvements will be the NYCDOE Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS), which keeps track of all student inappropriate behaviors, and the NYCDOE teacher and parent surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Strength: According to the School Quality Review (2014-2015) the school rated proficient in the area of school culture 3.4, to “Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations.” Additional strengths as outlined in the QR Report include:  Monthly walkthroughs for which teachers are provided with actionable feedback  Parent newsletters, and workshops are held to inform parents of the CCLS as well as conducting workshops on domestic violence and nutritional health  Teachers log and document workshops and meetings held with parents during “parent engagement time.” Teachers stated that they are more connected to their students’ families this year. Parents stated that they appreciate the opportunity to meet with their child’s teacher about progress.  Consistency of practice is maintained through New Teacher Orientations and mentoring Teachers will have the opportunity to take part in differentiated professional learning sessions that are developed and implemented by teachers as well as outside consultants. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  Principal and Assistant Principals will utilize the Danielson’s Rubric to provide teachers with specific actionable feedback that is data driven to improve teacher practices and in turn student outcomes. Teachers will participate in teacher lead inquiry work. This inquiry work will then drive curriculum development in order to craft targeted and differentiated instruction that meets the needs of all of the diverse learners in their classes. Priority Needs: State Review indicated that more differentiation of the curriculum map and resources for bilingual programs is needed to address all student goals and needs. (4.2) After school programs for ELL students for increased supplemental lessons and support. (SOP 4.2) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all teachers will engage in structured professional collaborations using the Data Wise inquiry approach to analyze school wide data, common formative assessments, and best practices. This will be evident by a 15% increase in effective teaching as measured by Domains 1 and 3 in the NYCDOE Advance system. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers work in professional learning communities every Monday for eighty minutes to analyze student work and tailor the curriculum to meet the needs of their students. Teachers utilize the model inquiry approach to identify the areas of needs and identify target populations. They then create SMART goals and scaffold the work for these students to ensure their academic success. (S.O.P 4.2, 4.4., 4.5) Teachers in grade level /department specific groups Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches, and teachers The Bilingual Committee to meet to revise and scaffold the curriculum with methodologies for the ELL. ( S.O.P 4.3, 4.4) K-5 Teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Coaches and teachers The Dual Language teachers to meet across grades monthly to deepen their understanding of ELL strategies and strengthen the curriculum map. ( S.O.P 4.3, 4.4) Principal will assign teachers to APs and herself, and establish a schedule for informal observations. These observations will utilize the Danielson Rubric to improve instruction in order to support student growth in Math and Literacy. Administration with place an emphasis on 3b from the Rubric to improve discussions and questioning techniques. (S.O.P 4.2, 4.4) A support group for parents to join to discuss ways in which they can support their children academically, socially, and emotionally at home will be facilitated by the Parent Coordinator and the Social Worker.(S.O.P 4.2, 4.4) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teacher and students Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Special Education Teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Parent Coordinator and Social Worker How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed about collaborative teacher teams and the work of the teams by the classroom teachers. The teachers will describe the inquiry model to the parents and how it effects their children in order to help their children at home. Teachers will invite parents to the classrooms during Tuesday's Parent Engagement time, and maintain logs of these connections. The assistant principals will check the parent engagement logs monthly to ensure accountability of the meetings and that all parents are contacted in some way, either in person or by phone. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Utilizing Title I Priority Focus Funds and Title III Funds have been set aside to pay for: We will use the Data Wise Inquiry Model as a tool with our Inquiry team as we look at student work using the protocol for looking at student work and the student analysis worksheet. Professional development on the Danielson’s rubrics (Professional text (SIOP) for ELL teachers to improve instructional text.Support of the Talent Coach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of all teachers would have been observed at least twice and received written actionable feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be the I-Ready Mathematics simulation test. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. X 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strength: 1. Identifying all students for targeted interventions and AIS supports. (SOP 2.5) 2. Classroom Teachers setting goals by group levels using an action plan strategy guide for support with targeted lessons. (SOP 2.3) 3. Classroom teachers monitoring progress with monthly assessments (SOP 2.5) 4. High level 2 students mentored by “adoptive” volunteer staff and teachers (SOP 2.2) 5. Parent workshops facilitated by the coaches, Mercy College’s Parent Center, and Our “WE CARE” Parent center focusing on how parents can work with their children and on addressing specific areas of need and understanding standardized tests (SOP 2.2) 6. Staff Developers, Coaches, Assistant Principals and the Principal working with classroom teachers in analyzing data identifying skills, and co-teaching. (SOP 2.5) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  7. Principal and A.P.s conducting observations and snapshots using the Charlotte Danielson rubric to provide timely, specific feedback to teachers. (SOP 2.5) 8. School has designed various afterschool programs to address the needs of different levels and subgroups of students including the ELL Academy for English Language Learners, Project Soar for students with special needs and level one students, Saturday Test Prep for students high level two and above, and Time on Task for at risk students in grades K-2 (SOP 2.4) 9. Principal and A.P.s make strategic decisions about professional learning for staff including weekly teacher team meetings, monthly staff meetings, and regular PL sessions provided by AUSSIE consultants in collaboration with instructional coaches (SOP 2.5) Priority Needs: A strategic decision to partner with Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project for curriculum support to monitor student progress and adjust the lessons for all students to improve Reading and Writing school-wide. (SOP 2.3) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades 3, 4, & 5 will meet or exceed performance levels in ELA and Math, by an increase of 10% from the benchmark of 23% in ELA and 21% in Math by deepening students experience in rigorous classroom instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Curriculum writing, embedding strategies for SWD & ELL students SWD & ELL Selected level 3 & 4 students engaged in Renzulli projects & tasks according to their learning styles and interests. 4 th & 5 th Grade Students with Level 3 & 4 Strengthening the Dual language Program for improved bilingual, bi-literate, and bi-cultural outcomes. Bilingual Classes Escorting parents to Mercy College for parent workshops via school buses Parents & Guardian Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Teachers, coaches, Assistant Principals, TC Coaches Principal, Library Media Specialist Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal, District Support Staff, Coaches, Assistant principals Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Mercy College 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 46 will engage families and support their understanding of effective school leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home by informing parents of school wide decisions in the SLT meetings and through the parent newsletter. There will be a specific section on helping your child at home. Parents will be invited to workshops at Mercy College and at the PS 46 main building. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Utilizing Title I Priority Focus Funds have been set aside to pay for: ● Teacher teams would need to work on the curriculum after school. ● Classroom resources would need to be purchase in Spanish for the Dual language classrooms. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  ● Intervisitations to Dual language schools will be arranged by support staff. ● Buses will be chartered to escort parents to the Mercy College campus. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress on improvement of the literacy program will be monitored by the Principal, Assistant Principals and Coaches, with action plans that reflect implementation of the feedback from observations, and a 10% increase on the I-ready ELA simulation for students in Grades 3,4, & 5 in January 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be the I-Ready ELA simulation test Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. x 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our schools strengths include the following: 1. The PS 46 “We CARE” Center will help bridge the culture of the home and school, by offering workshops that the parents are interested in, and maintaining an environment available for parent group discussions regarding improved outcomes for their children. (SOP 6.2) 2. Teachers and school leaders welcome parents into the school community during regularly scheduled parent events, such as Meet the Staff Night, Parent Teacher Conferences, Open School Week, and Parent Engagement Tuesdays (held weekly). Our learning environment survey indicates that 95% of parents either agree or strongly agree that the school makes it easy for parents to attend meetings by holding them at different times during the day and providing an interpreter or in other ways (Learning Environment Survey). (SOP 6.2, 6.3 & 6.5) 3. The Parent Coordinator will secure workshops from Professional community resources on asthma, obesity, and other family issues. (SOP 6.4 & 6.5) 4. The principal has facilitated workshops on “Introducing the Common Core” and understanding your child’s test scores to parents/ families. This workshop was translated for our Spanish Speaking parents. (SOP 6.4) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  5. Parents will be included in workshops to support their children’s learning facilitated by the Staff Developer and the coaches. (SOP 6.4) 6. Guidance counselors with the support of community based agencies (such as NYFoundling, Jewish Board, Visiting Nurse Services) will facilitate workshops on topics of concern that connect to the lives of our students and their children, i.e. signs of physical abuse, domestic violence, etc (SOP 6.4) 7. Sessions on citizenship and conversational English via the NYC Mayoral Program for parents of ELL will be conducted on Saturdays. (SOP 6.3) 8. Our state of the art parent center (established through a RESO grant) is equipped with a SMARTBOARD and computers that are accessible to parents daily during school hours. (SOP 6.3) 9. A monthly newsletter is sent home regarding school events and community activities. It will also include excerpts from the School-Parent Compact found in the SCEP. (SOP 6.3) 10. We have weekly social emotional intervention team meetings to address students and families that are in crisis. We have a social worker who connects families with agencies to support them and their children's success. (SOP 6.2) 11. We have monthly movie nights, Bingo Nights, and Karaoke Nights, which foster a feeling of trust and belonging in our school community. (SOP 6.2) 12. Parents are invited to monthly assemblies where students of the month are recognized for showing respect, treating others the way they would like to be treated, achieving excellence and being responsible. (SOP 6.2) 13. The quality reviewer noted that PS 46 has a very "caring staff that creates a very safe, supportive and respectful learning environment that enables both student and adult learning. (SOP 6.2) 14. Teachers and the school leader send newsletters to inform parents of important events and school expectations related to both social behavior and academics. (SOP 6.3) 15. An annual Thanksgiving food drive is organized in collaboration with Our Lady of Refuge. Our neediest students and their families are provided with food through the drive and the community soup kitchen. (SOP 6.2 & 6.4) 16. Fifth grade parents are invited to a workshop on building and maintaining healthy relationships with their child provided by NYC Healthy Relationship Training Academy. (SOP 6.4) 17. A classroom teacher will facilitate a workshop for parents on the use of technology programs used in school and at home (Raz-Kids, STMath, Think Central, etc) to support student success in reading and math (SOP 6.3 & 6.5). Our schools priority needs include: 1. Facilitation of parent workshops related to PBIS, to ensure that parents and families are familiar with school based efforts to establish a positive/ safe learning environment and to share such techniques so these efforts can be continued within the home. (SOP 6.4) 2. Progress reports (available in Spanish) will be sent home three times yearly (fall, winter and spring quarters) to share student data communicating student’s strengths and areas in need of improvement. (SOP 6.5) 3. Reciprocal communication with parents via class Dojo to ensure awareness of student strengths and needs. (SOP 6.3) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all classroom teachers will invite all guardians to join their class on Classdojo. They will engage all families via Class Dojo. This will be evident by 100% of all classes being registered on the ClassDojo platform and sending parent notifications bi-monthly. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Establish a forum and agenda by which parent workshops can be planned (PBIS, Inquiry Teams, Multi-Cultural Committee) Modify/ Finalize progress reports ensuring that the report provides accurate data related to academics and behavior. Reports will be written in understandable terms and translated in Spanish. Parents/ Guardians Parents/ Guardians Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches, and teachers Grade level teams - School administrators Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Sept. 2016 – June 2017 Sept. 2018 – May 2019 Establish a forum by which grade level events can be planned/ organized Parents/ Guardians Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Ensure the budget allows for the purchasing of necessary materials, for example tri-boards, flashcards, etc. The Parents Association in collaboration with school leaders will plan a Breakfast with Dads. Parents/ Guardians Sept. 2018 – May 2019 Parents Association 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. A few community based organizations that PS 46 currently works with are: Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Arts Horizons, Dancing Classrooms, and Dreamyard. We have partnered with these organizations through grants and school funds. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Utilizing Title I Priority Focus Funds and Title III Funds have been set aside to pay for: ● Parent workshops related to the data results of inquiry teams, time will be allotted during Monday’s weekly teacher PD. The PBIS Core Team meets weekly and the school-wide team meets monthly. During these meetings planning and preparation will ensue. ● Consumable supplies and materials will have to be purchased or obtained through World Vision such as paper, tri-boards, flashcards, etc. ● School events such as science fairs, Spelling Bee’s, a multiplication challenge, etc will be planned by grade during common planning time, embedded in the weekly prep schedule. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 all classrooms will have an active account on Class Dojo. We will monitor teacher and parent activity on the account by keeping information current and checking input weekly. Classes with the most parent activity monthly will be highlighted in the parent newsletter and on public school displays. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will administer our own parent survey in December, February, and May to continuously monitor progress for increasing family engagement in our school. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Zero Periods; Project Soar Afterschool Small Group During & After School program, ELL Academy Afterschool Program Zero Periods; Project Soar Afterschool program, ELL Academy Afterschool Program Zero Periods; Weekly Science Club after school program Zero Period Small Group During & After School Small Group Small Group During & After School During & After School Daily breakfast & lunch clubs Small Group, or one to one Before & During School Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Identified by Classroom Teacher based on State ELA and DRA assessments Identified by Classroom Teacher based on State Mathematics and Go Math assessments Identified by Classroom Teacher based on formative assessments Identified by Classroom Teacher based on formative assessments Identified by SEIT & RtI. SEIT students are selected based on behavioral/ guidance referrals and occurrence reports. RtI students are selected based on teacher referrals. Teachers refer students that are failing to make 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  adequate academic gains. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 310 students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All STH will be identified by the Pupil Accounting Secretary so that the STH Liaison and the Parent Coordinator can connect the families with supports and services. The services we currently provide school wide include school uniforms and school supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are a title I school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  We are a Title I school. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a Title I school 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: Attracting highly qualified teachers begins with a rigorous evaluation and screening process, where potential candidates must exhibit teaching competency with a demonstration lesson with the student population they are likely to teach. Each teacher that is newly hired to the school receives staff development and mentoring on the non-negotiables, the curriculum and best practices at PS46. Retention: Retaining our teachers is a priority and a collaborative school effort. A coach or staff developer is assigned to every first year teacher as a mentor. This is our second year of having our mentor teachers trained by New Teacher Center, as part of a cohort to receive training and development to better implement protocols for mentoring new teachers. New teachers to the school also undergo 3 full days of professional development with the Assistant Principals, and Coaches. A support system with buddy teachers and peer mentors is in place for all teachers. Class assignments have been rearranged to assign our most highly qualified teachers with our at risk students. Support: Classroom teachers are supported with team-teaching assignments that match up personalities and skill sets. Teachers are sent to Professional Development sessions that are offered throughout the city. Tapping into teachers’ skills to have them model demonstration lessons and facilitate “Teacher Team” meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  Teacher leaders are recognized and developed for leadership roles in their grades and the school. Professional Learning for teachers is designed around feedback from surveys, teacher interest, and needs. Extra Efforts: The school always recognizes teachers’ extra efforts with “Perfect Attendance” awards, and “Kudos” on going the extra mile in the weekly newsletter called “Spotlight on PS 46”. Also, PS 46 taps into teachers’ after school skills for enrichment programs that include a Musical Theater club, Art club, basketball and Stepping to name a few. All clubs are facilitated by our teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The Principal is part of the District 10's cohort of principals and meets monthly to transform school leaders practice by collaboratively problem solving, analyzing data, and being kept abreast of the latest resources to improve student achievement. The PS 46 coaches attend monthly meetings facilitated by outside support and New Teacher’s Center and they turn-key that information to the teachers and staff. The assistant principals conduct monthly meetings with teachers on Danielson’s Rubric and other pertinent information for staff improvement and growth. Teachers and Paraprofessionals will attend weekly Professional learning sessions. These sessions will be facilitated by outside consultants, our PS46 coaches, and other teachers. They will review pertinent information regarding their individual department and grade. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). We currently do not have a preschool program at PS 46. Students who are coming from outside preschools are invited to come to our school for a tour. The Parent Coordinator and the Parent’s Association president invite the parents to a workshop that reviews a few introductory items, mainly where and how to get supports, how to help your child at 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  home, and a welcome to PS 46. The parents also receive school supplies for their child and a list of summer reading for their preschooler. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school leaders and staff support are focused on building a distributive teacher leadership, the school is committed to establishing a core group of teacher representatives to work with the consultant and the school’s Literacy Coaches or and staff developer, to write and develop the school’s Common Core Learning Standards aligned ELA curriculum units and assessments based on Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project and GO Math, focused on supporting and developing skilled, critical thinking, lifelong readers, writers, and mathematicians. This teacher leadership group is the Curriculum Literacy & Math Team- across grade, vertical teacher team focused on leading their peers to implementing the Common Core Standards, guided by the Coaches and Consultants. Their task was to collaboratively refine and improve last year’s integrated thematic units of the school curriculum’s scope and sequence, aligning best practices in instruction and intervention including assessments. They regularly shared their progress with other staff members through scheduled grade level teacher team meetings and professional sessions for feedback and refinement of the units and assessments. Professional development to review and adjust the assessments takes place during Teacher Teams. The teachers meet by grade with the coaches to review and select appropriate multiple assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 974,288.00 16,979 186,902.00 199,586.00 53,198.00 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 6,703,247.00 X X N/A 5, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 46 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 46 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 46 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirements for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The goals of the ELL Academy are to help students acquire a level of proficiency in their second language; to provide differentiated instruction to all students in order to meet their English language needs; to encourage students to have a positive outlook in their abilities to learn a new language; to provide specialized instruction so that students may acquire a level of proficiency in their NYSESLAT exam; to help students demonstrate academic progress in Mathematics and English Language Arts by using different teaching strategies and tools as a guide and; to help students transfer skills of the native language into their second language acquisition. The ELL Academy meets on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:40-4:40 PM and currently serves 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade students in English for an approximate total of 135 students. The students invited and attending the program are currently at the Entering or Transitioning stages of English development. There are 9 classrooms with licensed teachers in either Bilingual or ESL Instruction. There is also 1 Bilingual computer lab teacher to co-teach with Reading A-Z (RAZ Kids) and Spatial Temporal (ST) Math. The classes will rotate into the lab 1 time per week for 30 minutes. The day is divided into one hour of literacy and one hour of math. The language of instruction for all students will be in English. The curricula used to foster the English language modalities of speaking, listening, reading and writing are the Common CORE Clinics by Options, Phonics for Reading by Curriculum Associates and the “NYSESLAT” practice books. As a supplement to the Math block, each group is using “Numbers Exploration”, the 4th grade is using “Advantage Mathematics’ and the 5th grade is using “Math to Know. The ST Math Games are used on the laptop (or mini-ipads) once a week to supplement the topics covered in math. The ELL Academy consists of students in grades 3, 4, & 5. Each grade has 3 classes, for a total of 9 classes. The average number of students per class is 16. There are 9 classroom teachers employed in the program and 1 Bilingual computer teacher. Eight teachers retain a NYS Bilingual Certification in Spanish, and 2 of the teachers retain an ESL certification. The program will run from November 2018 until April 2019, for 40 sessions, giving students a total of 80 hours of instruction in the ELL After-School Academy. The after-school program is scheduled for 2 hours on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:40 – 4:40 PM. The teachers will focus on 1 hour of literacy and 1 hour of math using The Common Core Clinics English Language Arts and Common Core Clinics Mathematics books. They will also have math in the computer lab utilizing ST Math (Spatial Temporal Math program) with all visuals for the ELLs. 60% of the allocated funds will go to direct instruction as follows:70 hours X 10 teachers X $55.23 rate = $38,661 Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  Part C: Professional Development topics to be covered   name of provider Begin description here: Professional Development will consist of unpacking the NYSESLAT with the Staff Developer. Teachers will all be given their list of ELL students and what stage of English proficiency they are currently. Our staff developer will provide for them the actual gap analysis for targeted instruction. Staff will also receive PD on the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) model of planning instruction for the ELLs. This PD will be facilitated by the UFT Teacher Center Coach, and the Staff developer. The SIOP planning Guide Books have been ordered for each ESL and Bilingual teacher. These additional services are at no cost to Title III and are covered by Title I Focus Funds. PD for the Bilingual/ESL teachers will be conducted as follows: September 2018: at 8:50 AM: The S.I.O.P Model: Facilitated by coaches; Participants: TBE, & ESL Teachers October 2018, : at 8:50 AM: The S.I.O.P Model: Facilitated by coaches; Participants: DL Teachers November 2018: at 8:50 AM: Using a Bar Model to Develop a Compare Word Problem: Facilitated by Dr. Scafidi (Math Consultant): Participants ESL & DL Teachers December 2018: at 8:50 AM; Review of the Dual Language Program Model: Facilitated by coaches; Participants: DL Teachers January 2019 at 8:50 AM: Math Focus for ELLs: Facilitated by Dr. Scafidi (Math Consultant): Participants TBE, ESL & DL Teachers February 2019: at 8:50 AM: Guided Reading for ELLs: Facilitated by coaches; Participants TBE, ESL & DL Teachers March 2019: at 8:50 AM: Math Focus for ELLs: Facilitated by Dr. Scafidi (Math Consultant): Participants TBE, ESL & DL Teachers April 2019: at 8:50 AM: Using Language and Content Objectives: Facilitated by Coaches; Participants TBE, ESL & DL Teachers May 2019: at 8:50 AM: Looking at Authentic Assessments for ELLs: Facilitated by Coaches; Participants TBE, ESL & DL Teachers June 2019: at 8:50 AM: ESL & Native Language Objectives: Facilitated by Coaches; Participants TBE, ESL & DL Teachers Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities The parents are full partners in the education of their children at P.S. 46. The PS 46 "We CARE Parent Center" will open their doors as an additional resource for the parents. This center has been created with funding received from the Bronx Borough President’s office. The Parent Center will be a place of full operation with a Parent Coordinator who works closely with the Parents Association in coordinating, planning and providing all parent literacy classes, parenting workshops and parent volunteer workshops. Parents will also be invited to participate in a parent institute on Saturdays for 22 sessions to enrich and expand their participation in their children’s education via ESL classes, literacy classes, trips and art projects. This institute will help bridge the culture of the home and school. Parents will be included in parent workshops to support their children’s language acquisition as it is developed through the various programs. The program that is scheduled to begin this year along with our parent workshops is "We are New York", a NYC Mayoral Program that was very successful in the past, and we look forward to the sessions this year. These services will be provided by a certified ESL teacher, the Library Media Specialist, and the parent Coordinator. The parent classes will be held from 8:30 AM to 12:30 PM, and a light breakfast will be served. The librarian is at no additional costs to Title III and is covered by the Robin Hood Funds for library Services The schedule for the 22 parent workshops is as follows: November 3rd, 10th, 17th December 1st, 8th,15th January 5th, 12th, 19th, 28th February 2nd, 9th, 16th March 2nd, 9th, 16th, 23rd April 6th, 13th, 20th May 4th, 11th & 18th, All 23 workshops will be conducted by our school Library Media Specialist, Ms. Ramirez, along with our ESL teacher Ms. Cabral on Saturdays from 8:30 AM to 12:30 PM in the library. The title of all of the workshops is “ESL Lessons Integrating the use of Technology”. Parents will be engaged in cooperative learning groups to practice, role-play, and conduct hands on activities. The goal is to provide the parents with tools to enhance their English language proficiency and to provide informative workshops of their interest. Lessons will be taught using modalities such as: listening, speaking, reading and writing. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 61312 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 61312 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Edgar Allan Poe Literacy Development Borough Bronx School Number 046 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jennifer Alexander-Adé Coach Widalys Quiles ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher K. Kuks Teacher/Subject Area Alfredo Arroyo/Science Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Alyssia Harris Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Roxanna Bello-Sullivan Coach Kellmie Moreno School Counselor Miriam Ayala Parent Jose Silvestre Sanchez Parent Coordinator Fidelina Miguel Field Support Center Staff Member Jose Ruiz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 4 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 18 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1022 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62 Total number of ELLs 408 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 39.92%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 2 1 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 2 1 2 3 4 2 2 4 2 2 1 3 5 1 1 2 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 9 0 0 8 0 0 17 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At PS46, we use the TC Running Record to assess and monitor progress of literacy skills. The TCRR has also been purchased in Spanish (EDL) to assess student’s development in their native language. The TCRR assesses the literacy skills in Reading Comprehension, fluency, and decoding of the ELLs in English and the EDL assesses the students’ skills in Spanish. The baseline results of the TCRR in the DL, TBE, and ESL programs show that in the DL and ESL classes there are a number of students who are below or approaching standards as opposed to the TBE classes where 85% of the students are below level. The TCRR is administered 3 times per year for all students and the EDL is administered 2 times a year for our students in the bilingual classes. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  To support this effort we have coaches and assistant principals assigned to each grade. They will help teachers complete assessments and analyze the data. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the programs for ELLs is evaluated by baseline and benchmark measures. We participate in the ELE along with interim assessments for the ELLS. Although we did not meet Safe Harbor for our ELLs in the ELA, our latest accountability report shows that our ELLs did make safe harbor for the Math. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures that are in place to address interventions are weekly RtI meetings and weekly teacher team meetings where data is reviewed and discussed for analysis and interventions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] This year our instructional focus with RtI is to begin with a rigorous evidenced based core curriculum. This is our Tier 1 intervention. Our Tier 2 for RTi is a double dose of instruction where our ELLs receive extra support and attention in specific groups. Our Tier 3 is intensive intervention in small groups. These interventions are based on individual student needs. Our literacy curriculum builds in text-based conversation and team talk protocols. Our Literacy consultant and Generation Ready Math consultant and coaches have modeled and provided professional development to teachers in grades K to 5 underscoring unit adaptations including scaffolded Rti interventions for instruction, close reading and student-to-student discussion. Go Math has ELL language support, activities as well as RTI, and enrichment. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL data collected this past September indicates that 90% of the students who were tested did not pass the NYSITELL. The patterns across NYSESLAT modalities reveal that there needs to be a heavy emphasis on Reading and Writing particularly in Grades K – 2. There is an improvement from Second to third grade by lessening the number of students in the beginning levels in Reading and Writing. The number of proficient students increases in Reading and Writing as the students move up the grades. In the area of Listening and Speaking the increase of Beginners in 3rd and 4th grade is mainly due to the influx of newcomers. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to disseminate these findings the ENL and Bilingual teachers participate in monthly meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS46 offers instruction for our ELLs via TBE, DL, or ENL programs. The ENL program has 2 models of instruction either as an ENL freestanding class or a push in or pull out model with an ENL teacher. A certified ENL teacher, teaches the push in or pullout model for students in grades K-2. And another certified ENL teacher, teaches the pull out model for Grades 3 – 5. Students of mixed proficiency are heterogeneous grouped in the free-standing ESL classes. However, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  students in the push in or pull out models are grouped by proficiency levels. When the ENL pushes into a class, she co-teaches with the classroom teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. Students in the Transitional Bilingual Program receive instruction in both English and Spanish by certified bilingual teachers. Students are grouped heterogeneously by proficiency level. Language allocation in the TBE meets state mandates as per CR PART 154. HLA in TBE is taught in the content area of Social Studies and Science. c. DL program. If applicable. The Dual Language model uses a 50/50 English/Spanish model in grades K-5. Spanish instruction is instruction in the content area. English instruction is in the common core area. These changes are being implemented due to the new Ready Gen Core Curriculum. The students in the DL program are mixed heterogeneously by proficiency, with many having already become proficient on the NYSESLAT assessment. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The bilingual classroom teacher is assisted by, Ms. Quiles, the Bilingual Staff Developer, to ensure that a program is created that explicitly delivers the mandated instructional time in compliance with CR 154. Entering and emerging level students in the push in/pull out programs receive 360 minutes per week - one unit of study ENL and the second unit in ENL/ELA. Students at the transitioning and expanding levles receive 180 minutes weekly and commanding students continue to receive services for an additonal two years. The ENL teachers’ programs are monitored by the principal to ensure that the mandated hours are received by each student. Literacy instruction in DL classrooms alternates from native language to English language the allocation of language arts instruction in DL classes is 50% ELA and 50% NLA. Native language instruction is implemented with instruction in the content areas. In our 7 period day, the goal is to implement the NL for 3 full periods, the ELA for 3 full periods, and 1 period for lunch. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas are delivered in each program model in various ways according to the program. In the ENL classes content is delivered in English only. In the Dual Language classes content is delivered in Spanish and Common Core Literacy is delivered in English for a 50/50 split of both languages daily. In the TBE classes content area of the curriculum is delivered in Spanish for 35 minutes with 10 minutes of ENL support. The goal of Content Area instruction in the TBE model is to transfer the knowledge acquired in their native language to English, as the students become more English Proficient. Native language supports are provided in all content areas. All DL and TBE classrooms receive class sets of Go Math in both English and Spanish. Also, science and social studies curriculum materials (textbooks, workbooks, supplemental materials) are provided in both English and Spanish. DL classes alternate the language of instruction in the content areas by unit, switching language approximately once a month. There is no native language instruction in ENL classes; instead, teachers used research-based ESL strategies, such as TPR, visual aides, to support language acquisition in all content areas. They may also uses other resources to assist with comprehension. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ELL students are appropriately evaluated in their native language with formative assessments created by the teachers. The teachers also maintain conference logs and student portfolios. The teachers also administer the DRA in Spanish which is the EDL. The transitional bilingual and dual language programs both have guided reading materials in the native language and leveled libraries in the native language as well. Math, Science, and Social Studies materials are also available in Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The classroom teachers have all been notified of any SIFE students in their classrooms. We will continue to use a guided reading teacher whose schedule has been divided between general guided reading groups and guided reading/writing groups for SIFE students to service students with interruption of formal education. We will also continue to use Raz-Kids, a differentiated program that uses technology on the students’ Reading level. These students will also meet with the Bilingual Social Worker Ms. Maydwell or a Guidance Counselor to help them adapt to their environment. b. PLAN FOR ELLS IN US SCHOOLS LESS THAN THREE YEARS (NEWCOMERS) ELLs in schools less than three years will be placed in their appropriate program based on the NYSETILL or NYSESLAT scores. Their scores will be analyzed and instruction that supports their individual needs will be delivered. Additional supports such as AIS small groups, 1 to1 instruction as needed, ELL Academy After-School program, and Push in Supports with “Estrellita” a native language program for beginners will be provided to applicable students. c. DEVELOPING 4-6 YEARS OF SERVICE An emphasis on Enrichment will be placed for these students, along with target differentiation. We will continue to monitor their progress, and use interest survey to generate projects and more independence. d. LONG TERM SIX YEARS OR MORE Students’ progress will be closely monitored by the classroom teacher, bilingual staff developer Ms. Quiles, and guidance to ensure that the student receives the support he/she needs. e. PLAN FOR FORMER UP TO TWO YEARS AFTER EXITING Former ELLS in years 1 & 2 after reaching commanding will continue to get support to maintain their gains. Parents will be given the options to have their child either stay in TBE or switch to DL. They will continue to get testing modifications for extra time during years one and two after reaching commanding. They will be monitored by their classroom teachers and given opportunities in the classroom for continued English acquisition, 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade level materials teachers of ELL-SWD use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development are the ReadyGen curriculum and the AWARDs Reading program online component. The AWARDS program is a research based program that scaffolds comprehension with engaging non-fiction literature. In Mathematics, the students will be instructed with Go Math. Teachers will use sound teaching practices for ELLs, such as providing many picture supports, cooperative learning groups to encourage speaking, develop listening skills, using TPR, and providing instruction that supports their learning styles. Our special education teachers differentiate the tasks and always provide kinesthetic, audio and tactile experiences to students to ensure they accomplish the task. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At PS46, we use curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment by creating a school schedule and calendar that allows all of SWD to be mainstreamed according to their IEPs, for certain periods of the day, such as Gym, Drama, or Art. The teachers of SWD have also been provided a weekly common prep for PD where they learn techniques for working with the SWD population. To date the teachers of SWD 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  students have already participated in F.A.T. City, a program by Rick Lavoie, that coaches participants through experiences of Frustration, Anxiety, and Tension that many children with learning disabilities experience. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention services offered are guided reading, AIS, afterschool programs some students are also targeted thru the inquiry cycle population study by the grade level Professional Learning Community. Tagreted interventions in Math, Social Studies, and Science is in small groups with assessments to monitor progress and identify any gaps. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The ENL pullout and pushin teachers will be incorporating the program, Language Power that provides rigorous instruction in the four language domains: listening, speaking, reading, and writing- 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not plan to discontinue any services for the ELLs this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. In order to continue to meet the instructional expectations called for in the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) our title III monies will be used to implement a supplemental afterschool program, ELL Academy, to improve students' skills in reading, writing, and word study. Our goal is to provide support for our ELL students to achieve success in mastering the skills to pass the standardized test for their perspective grades. This will fuel a positive movement towards qualitative performance and hold ELLs to the same high standards and expectations as non-ELL students. Beginning in October and ending in May, about 140 students in bilingual education classes in grades 3 through 5 will participate in an after-school program that will run two days a week for a total of 80 hours. This program will be aligned to the CCSS and the New York State ESL Standards. The program will consist of an intensified reading and writing academy in which ten to twelve students per class will be able to better develop reading, writing, listening and speaking skills. Our ELL students are also supported with an extra ELL teacher who is trained in "Estrellita" and works with small groups for student supports. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Each of our classes is equipped with a SMART Board. The SMART Board is an interactive, electronic whiteboard that enhances instruction and learning. The SMART Notebook software makes it possible for teachers to create content rich, dynamic lessons addressing specific student skills. These boards increase the interactive atmosphere in the classroom which in return increases the learning experience and student engagement. The teacher can go online via for additional home language supports. Additional instructional supports for the ELLs include "Spatial Temporal (ST) Math" which is an online Math tool in all visuals, and Estrellita a phonics based support. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the Bilingual Education program, each classroom is enriched with bilingual libraries. Students are exposed to literature surrounding various cultures and traditions. Teachers use blue ink for all charts to differentiate the Spanish language. Teachers in TBE programs use the color blue (Spanish) to separate language use around the classroom. This separation of languages allow students to refer to the charts when working independently. The flow of the day or daily schedule clearly defines the subject, objective, and language of instruction. In the English as a Second Language program, students have access to bilingual glossaries and buddy systems. There are bilingual paraprofessionals to support students in Bilingual Special Education classrooms. In addition both programs heavily rely on the use of SIOP strategies to make content comprehensible for ELL students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services and resources provided by our school correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our goal is to provide support for our ELLs to achieve success in mastering the necessary skills needed to meet the demands of the CCLS and work towards 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  becoming college and career ready. This will fuel a positive movement towards qualitative performance and hold ELLs to the same high standards and expectations as all students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Each of our classes is equipped with a SMART Board. The SMART Board is an interactive, electronic whiteboard that enhances instruction and learning. The SMART Notebook software makes it possible for teachers to create content rich, dynamic lessons addressing specific student skills. These boards increase the interactive atmosphere in the classroom which in return increases the learning experience and student engagement. The teacher can go online via for additional home language supports. Additional instructional supports for the ELLs include "Spatial Temporal (ST) Math" which is an online Math tool in all visuals, and Estrellita a phonics based support. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year newly enrolled ELL students are invited with their families to attend a parent orientation during which they are informed about the variety of programs available for their children based on ELL eligibility. The Parents Association holds meetings on a monthly basis which these parents are welcomed to attend. They receive a welcome packet in English and Spanish with children books and school supplies. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are currently not offered to any students at PS46. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? PS 46 has a self-contained Dual Language program. EP and ELL's are integrated for 100% of the day. ELA is taught in English. Social Studies and Science is taught in Spanish, and Math is taught in both English and Spanish. Emergent literacy is taught in both languages according to the schedule. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As per our professional community calendar, ELL teachers including TBE, DL, and ENL personnel partake in Department Meetings whereby they share professional resources and best practices. Teachers have analyzed NYSESLAT and converted raw scores to scale scores to determine student groups to target the four modalities. In addition we have established first Wednesdays of the month to meet as department. DL and TBE teachers will continue in a book study of "Teaching Reading and Writing in Spanish and English in Bilingual and Dual Language Classrooms by Yvonne and David Freeman and workshops will be faciliatated by the literacy coach and staff developer.: Through the launching of literacy units and common grade meetings teachers of ELLs and literacy team discuss resources to support ELLs to meet the CCLS. In addition, teachers of ELLs refer to the NYSED's New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) and Home Language Arts Progressions (HLAP) for lesson planning to ensure that students are meeting the CCLS. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. This year we have been awarded with the Arts Continuum Grant from the Office of Arts & Special Projects. Our fifth graders have partnered with 45X, a middle school. In addition our guidance counselors have provided workshops to parents of fifth grade students focusing on the middle school application process. The language allocation policy will be a big part of our professional development for the ELL personnel at our school. We will also continue to work closely with our BSFC to provide professional development in Jose P. and other pertinent information to our staff. All of the DL teachers will receive professional development by BSFC. We will continue to inform our teachers of professional development opportunities outside of our school offered by the OELL and others. A yearlong calendar has been developed by the coaches and Staff Developer to implement monthly PD for all ELL personnel. Items included differentiated instruction, SIOP Model, Language Aquistion. Through the UFT Teacher Center, professional institutes will be provided to selected staff members including assistant principals, guidance counselors, parent coordinator, and teachers of ELL’s. In November, December, March. In addition, a spring and summer institute will be offered to additional staff members that teach ELL’s. In December, teachers of ELL’s, Parent Coordinator, Bilingual Guidance Counselors, and Assistant Principals will be invited to attend a citywide conference for ELL’s. This session will focus on zeroing in on academic language. Teacher Center will also be providing these workshops. Our Bilingual/ESL Coach will be facilitating the grade 3-5 sessions. Teacher Center Coach/Liaison and Literacy Staff Developer attend ongoing Professional Development for the Estrellita Program and other PD offered by venues such as TC, R-BERN etc., and turnkey the information to teachers of ELL students. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PS 46 provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas during parent meetings. Parent teacher conference are scheduled for November and March annually. Teachers also meet with parents during the extended "Tuesday Parent Engagement" time. Teachers also schedule parents to come in during their prep periods if need be. Translation is provided by support staff in Spanish for Parent Teacher Conferences. The parent coordinator also secures translations through outside resources and DOE phone translation options. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We believe in supporting our parents as partners in the educational program of their children. All school related information is available in the language spoken by the families in our school community. Assemblies, shows, math bingo night, and literacy night are held throughout the year for children and families. Each assembly and/or show is organized by the grade level supervisor and teachers. Parents are invited to monthly PA meetings to discuss how the school may further meet the needs of their children. Our parent coordinator, is actively involved in providing parents of ELLs with appropriate information and services. She helps ensure that parents of ELLs are contributing members of the education community. Translation is provided by support staff in Spanish for Parent Teacher Conferences. The parent coordinator also secures translations through outside resources and DOE phone translation options. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jennifer Alexander-ade, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S 46 Edgar Allan Poe School DBN: 10X046 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Jennifer Alexander-Ade Principal Roxanna Bello-Sullivan Assistant Principal Fidelina Miguel Parent Coordinator Kim Kuks ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jose Silvestre Sanchez Parent Alfredo Arroyo/Science Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Widalys Quiles Coach Coach Miriam Ayala School Counselor Maribel Hulla Jose Ruiz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 09/06/17 09/06/17 09/06/17 09/06/17 09/06/17 09/06/17 09/06/17 09/06/17 09/06/17 09/06/17 09/06/17 09/06/17 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X046 School Name: Edgar Allan Poe Superintendent: MaribelHulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Fidelina Miguel Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. For newcomers to the New York City public school system, two certified ENL teachers, conduct an oral interview to the student and parent, as well as administer the Home Language Identification Survey to the parent. Home language Surveys are available in fourteen languages other than English. P.S. 46 has staff that provides translation services in the following languages: Spanish, French, and a few African Dialects. Parents are asked about their home language preference during registration. Parents can select which language they would prefer to receive their home communication. It may become necessary to use the language line during the registration of students. Spanish being the largest language for interpretation, is easily covered by in-house staff. However, other languages may require the staff to use the Language Line number which staff utilizes to access 200 plus languages so they can speak to all parents regardless of preferred language. The parent coordinator will reach out to the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  parents and let them know they can easily communicate in their language with the school and at that time staff assesses what events or documents will require an interpreter present or documents to be translated. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The major findings of our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs are that our population requires Spanish translations for all communications. Signs describing the availability of phone translations are posted in the lobby and Main Office as parents enter the building. The Parent Coordinator assists the parents in identifying the language they would need to communicate with the staff. The school community is notified of these availabilities at Parent Orientations, Parent Meeting, and SLT meetings. Other languages that families at PS46 speak are French, Bengali, Albanian, and a few African dialects. N/A N/A N/A Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese Cantonese French Fulani Haitian Creole English Slovak Spanish Soninke Twi N/A N/A N/A 0.18 0.46 0.36 0.09 0 0.46 0.46 0.09 44.54 0 53.28 0 0.09 N/A N/A N/A 2 5 4 0 1 5 6 1 484 1 587 1 1 N/A N/A N/A 0.18 0.46 0.36 0 0.09 0.46 0.55 0.09 44.08 0.09 53.46 0.09 0.09 N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families The first week of each month. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. These documents are all translated into Spanish by staff. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A The following documents contain critical information about educational programs and services and must be translated: monthly newsletters, monthly calendars, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information and other general letters from the school leadership. N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Typical face to face meetings with parents throughout the school year are: September Parent Orientation, November and March Parent -Teacher Conferences, and Tuesday evening Parent Meetings during parent engagements set by classroom teacher. Teachers are also available during their prep for scheduled meetings with parents. September 13, 2017 November 16, 2017 March 15, 2018 May 23rd, 2018 interpretation service(s)? Since the language line is only operational during school hours, scheduled interpreters will be available per request during the evening conferences. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 75  A list is provided to each teacher of their students names and parents preferred language and contact numbers, in the header in BIG BOLD is the 1-800- Language Line number which staff utilizes to access 200 plus languages so they can speak to all parents regardless of preferred language. Teachers can make calls to this number in case of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Information on how to use translation services, language access, or outreach will be provided to all staff members via teacher memos and our school's weekly newsletter. The weekly newsletter is sent to each staff member via email from the principal. In addition, the SLT will review CR A-663 on the agenda. The language line access and how to use the phone translation will also be posted on each floor. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Limited -English Proficient parents will be made aware of their right to receive information via posting signage around the school in the languages spoken by the parents describing using Language Line to let the parents know that they can speak to staff in their preferred language. This will allow staff to access 200 plus languages so they can speak to all parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school will be scheduled to gather feedback and best practices on communicating with families. A parent survey will be sent via "Class Dojo" an online App, which can be translated to all languages will be sent by the parent coordinator for parent feedback. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 76 
