2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 09X058 P.S. 058 Principal: VELMA GUNN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 09x058 Public School 58 320900010058 Elementary 459 East 176 Street Bronx, NY 10457 718-583-6895 Fax: Vgunn@Schools.nyc.gov Email Address: 718-583-6866 Phone Number: Velma Gunn School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Velma Gunn Carolyn Robinson TanishaDaniel Deborah Lewis TanishaDaniel N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 9 Superintendent’s Office Address: Leticia Rodriguez-Rosado Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue Bronx, New York 10456 LRosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-825-0478 Phone Number: 718-410-8933 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx, ny Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 8286280 Phone Number: 718-828-7776 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Velma Gunn Carolyn Robinson TanishaDaniel Grace Tucker TanishaDaniel Lorraine Sanders Deborah Lewis *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Teacher-Chairperson 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Milagros Garcia LeonildaMunoz Natasha Frias Erika Merejildo Parent -Treasurer Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to create a safe child-centered learning environment that is built on a foundation of high quality standards, supportive of collaboration and teamwork. We build upon the varied strengths of students, staff and parents in the development of programs and curriculum. Our commitment is to continuously improve the delivery of instruction so that there is measurable achievement in the academic performance of all students. We work diligently at providing a rich curriculum supported by engaging and rewarding experiences, resulting in lifelong learners. We celebrate diversity and strive to in-still integrity, compassion and confidence in each child. We are committed to 2018-19 CEP 9  maintaining an environment that supports inquiry and academic excellence, emotional and physical well-being, appreciation of the arts and diverse cultures, integrity and ethical behavior. Theory of Action If Public School 58X Lions prides itself on creating professional learning communities and opportunities, which foster our cohesive approach to student-centered learning, then we will be able to support all members with strategies and expectations that embody the elements of the L.I.O.N.S: Leaders, Innovators, Organizers, Negotiators, and Scholars; resulting in improved learning outcomes for all students. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At Public School 58 we provide rigorous and individualized academic instruction in all content areas. Through collaboration and the infusion of technology, students will become career and college ready. Our Instructional Focus includes Strategic Guided and Independent Reading, Shared Inquiry, Collaborative Mathematics through the 5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions and Reading and Writing in the Content Subjects. This year our professional development action plan includes deepening our professional learning community. Teacher teams work horizontally and vertically. Professional Development with collaboration of teams has had a positive impact on teaching and learning. We have included Instructional Teacher Rounds supported by the District 9 collaboration with Harvard University. Teachers video themselves and identify Problems of Practice and develop action plans as teams. We will increase the participation of Teacher Rounds this year. Teachers will deepen their training in the implementation of Shared Inquiry with the Jr. Great Books Program as a resource to help support our schools focus of increasing academic rigor through the use of Shared Inquiry Discussions across the grades. Shared Inquiry will be integrated in all content areas across all grades. This will result in consistency and coherence at our school. Professional development occurs weekly and grade level common planning meetings are scheduled for all grades. In addition, teachers meet and plan before, after- school, Saturdays and per-session and training rates are provided as per the contract. Monthly professional development supports our collaboration with the Teacher’s College Writing Project. Research based strategies are supported by our Junior Great Books Shared Inquiry Consultant, Literacy and Technology Consultant, and our Early Reading Matters Consultant. Teacher Teams focus on Common Core Unit planning, aligning Performance Tasks, and infusing the Charlotte Danielson Framework which has resulted in increased collaboration with teachers and an increase in the depth of student work specifically writing as measured by rubrics/checklists and student work using Teacher’s College Writing Units of Study as a resource. Review of student portfolios in literacy and mathematics indicate an increase in the number of students reaching proficiency based on the rubrics across the grades. Implementation of our goals required rigorous researched based curriculum that is supported by professional development that infuses the Common Core Standards which meet DOE expectations. The school community monitors and tracks student progress towards goals across the grades. Teachers use common assessments embedded in the units of study with rubrics/checklists that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards to assess students’ progress toward achieving school goals across the grades. Students’ results are then used to adjust the curriculum and classroom instruction so that all of our students, including ENLs and SWDs, demonstrate increased mastery. School leaders were able to make strategic decisions regarding resources and professional development and teachers were better equipped to support English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities as they access content and made their thinking visible through the implementation of Student Designed Instruction (SDI). Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (S.I.O.P.) designed lessons included language and content objectives to support instruction. The primary goals of the year are aligned with our SCEP, Quality Review feedback and our Principal Performance Review Feedback suggestions. These intended goals were designed and developed based on data, student and teacher outcomes. The use of formative and summative assessments, base-line, mid-line, and end- ine assessments are utilized in reading, writing and mathematics school wide. For Tier 1 assessments in Grades K-5, the school uses I-READY. Instructional paths are created for students using I-READY and Waterford, (K-2). We implement school wide assessments as follows: Running Records Benchmarks using Fountas and Pinnell. The Fundations, research based 2018-19 CEP 10  phonics program is used with students in K-2. Our school has collaborated on teacher teams throughout the year which has become a strength and focal point for our school. Teachers work together weekly, planning and sharing best practice. Units of study with a focus on more rigorous curriculum have been the content of meetings and planning sessions. We are using The Writing Units of Study produced by Columbia’s Teacher’s College as a resource. Grade Level Lead Teachers will receive training at The Reading and Writing Teacher's College Project to support their learning. Looking at appropriate resources and materials to meet instructional goals has teachers working together to improve instruction. Teachers meet and discuss assessments and student work. Teachers have critical friends and this has increased the level of trust in the school. The consistent grade level meetings have helped teachers share lessons and work collaboratively at setting grade goals. Teachers use the Common Core Standards to develop higher level expectations across the school. All teachers meet for Professional Development, this includes General Education Teachers, teachers of English New Language Learners and Special Education Teachers. This builds on our goals from last year of having an effective professional learning community. The structure especially the weekly schedule supports this collaborative effort that has increased the consistency in the school. Teachers are using the Danielson’s Framework 3b, 3c and 3d to measure their growth and make adjustments when planning as well as assessing students. The impact of this work, to date, is students are showing progress towards meeting their goals. Teacher practice has improved as evidenced by the use of the Danielson's Framework. Teacher teams are moving the implementation, evaluation and success of our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school supports English Language Learners in developing effective skills for learning and comprehending English. Using research based instructional strategies and resources students and teachers will be equipped with the necessary tools for language development. We focus on vocabulary using strategies from Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocols (SIOP), and Shared Inquiry to develop meaningful discussions promoting the use of language for communication. Students have rich classroom libraries and Imagine Learning on-line support. Bilingual classes and push-in/pull-out supports are provided to our ENLs. Our SWDs are provided with small group instruction using Common Core aligned materials with adjustments when necessary Students are provided with SETTS, Self Contained, Mainstreaming, and ICT classes based on their needs. We provide meaningful collaborative opportunities for students to successfully move along the continuum, through main streaming, inter-visitations, project- based learning, parental involvement, and celebrations. This includes but is not limited to Heritage Day, Open Houses, Literacy and Math Fairs. These events provided opportunities for families to engage in learning strategies which can support the social emotional development of habits of minds leading to college and career readiness. Our ultimate goal for 2018-19 is to become a project based Museum School. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The development of Teacher Teams based on trust has had a tremendous impact on our school. Teachers regularly reflect on and improve their capacity to deliver high quality instruction to students. During these meetings, a key focus on student achievement using data resulted in the development of effective Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and Response To Intervention (RTI) groups in ELA and Math across the grades during Teacher Teams meetings. Teachers conducted Teacher Rounds and used video to view and make adjustments in their practice. Using Shared Inquiry across the grades, students were engaged in deeper conversations and developing questions. The overall school trust level increased and impacted the elements of the Framework for Great Schools. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X058 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 471 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 78 79 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 94.5% % Reduced Lunch 21.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 72.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.25 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 24.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 84% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 11 11 87.3% 0.6% 25.7% 25.1% 0.4% 0.6% 2 10% 7.9 31.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YSH N/A N/A NO NO YSH N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher Leaders and Coaches will create a community that can build ongoing knowledge related to literacy learning and teaching to build capacity and sustain the work with a team and colleagues. Then students will comprehend more sophisticated texts within the literacy block and use classroom-based assessment effectively, resulting in increased student performance. All students benefit from Common Core aligned curricula across content areas that integrates the instructional shifts and builds coherence by engaging students in rigorous tasks, thereby promoting college and career readiness. The school purposely infuses academic vocabulary in writing across all subjects and emphasizes the use of complex text as part of their instructional shifts integration. Lesson design promotes college and career readiness for all students by developing verbal collaboration during group assignments. As a result, all students have access to a rigorous curriculum. We will continue to deepen differentiation of instruction, including effective questioning that elicits higher order thinking and extends learning, so that all lessons engage students and offer suitable challenge at their level. We will strengthen assessment practices to ensure that students are routinely provided with actionable feedback and teachers use ongoing checks for understanding to make effective lesson adjustments to meet all students' learning needs. After a careful review of the Citywide Expectations, and the student data, teachers and supervisors determined that there was a need to provide daily guided literacy to Grade K-5 students in reading and writing appropriate responses to literary and informational texts using text-based evidence. In addition, our students need to increase questioning and discussion of texts to support their comprehension and writing. This will result in an increase in Danielson’s 3b Questioning and Discussion, 3c Student Engagement and 3d Assessment. June 2018 data indicates that more than 40% of our students in Grades 3-5 are performing below grade level as measured by the I-Ready ELA Assessment. June 2018 data indicates that more than 30% of our students in Grades K-2 are performing below grade level as measured by the I-Ready ELA Assessment. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 1: By June 2019, we will increase the percentage of students who meet or exceed their target growth (one year’s growth of growth), in Grades 2-5 based on the i-Ready Growth Report in Reading, from 24% in June 2018, to 30% in June 2019. If teachers are provided with instructional supports for reading and writing practices through Teacher's College, Shared Inquiry, Junior Great Books and Early Reading Matters on the implementation of effective strategic teaching then, the results will indicate improvement in teacher practice and student achievement. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher programs will have two scheduled periods per week of common planning time. In grade teams, teachers will analyze data obtained from summative and formative assessments to identify students in need of AIS or enrichment activities. The assessment calendar will include baselines, midlines and endlines. In addition, benchmark assessments are administered using F & P Assessments, Writing Units of Study Rubrics, Santa Cruz Unit Norming, and I-Ready Assessments. Teachers will conduct monthly inter-visitations, teacher rounds and learning walks. Observations cycles will be aligned with our instructional focus. Coaches will work directly with grade and subject area teams to ensure Guided Literacy using a balanced approach, Shared Inquiry, and adjusted TC Writing Units are in alignment with CCLS and informed by data. Writing Units will be monitored and tracked using baseline, midline and endline writing assessments using text evidence and higher order comprehension questions. . All Teachers Weekly, September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches, Consultants, teachers SE Teachers and classroom of SWD students September 2018 – June 2019 Instructional support specialist, SWD teachers, Shared Inquiry Consultants, classroom teachers CAL, ESL and classroom teachers Professional development on the Shared Inquiry Models, Guided Literacy using a balanced approached, and TC Writing Units to design and deliver lessons that address Danielson's 3b, 3c, and 3d, monthly. ESL teachers and Classroom teachers of ELL students September 2018 – June 2019 Parents/Guardians of SWDs, ELLs and other at-risk students October 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Teachers and a local CBO, Children’s Aid Society, Department of Mental Health Parent involvement programs will include “Literacy Nights” and “Parents as Partners in learning” to promote literacy development at home thus ensuring that teachers and parents think of each other as partners in educating children, monthly. School wide events will provide opportunities for families to engage in learning strategies which can support the social emotional development of habits of mind leading to college and career readiness. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 15  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents have weekly opportunities for workshops and sessions aligned to the curriculum. In addition teachers will have an Open House monthly for parents to learn side by side with their children. We began planning educational trips for parents and assigned two teachers to work with the Parents' Association. Parents also have Saturday Programs designed to teach English as a New Language and understanding the Common Core Curriculum. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Master schedule programming to allow two periods a week of common planning time for all teachers       Consultants for Shared Inquiry, Increased classroom libraries, Rosetta Stone SWD and ENL staff to provide professional development Funding for vendor to provide SIOP training, materials, unit of study Funding for partner to provide parent outreach programming Funding for teacher coach, certified ENLs and SWD teachers Funding for Staff development at Teacher's College to support writing, Junior Great Books Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -Administrative observation of implementation of differentiation of instruction for ENLs, SWDs and at-risk students in general education classroom as evidenced in Advance. -Improved performance of ENLs in ELA as evidenced by interim assessments: Running Records, I-Ready, Envision Math , Student Work -Increased attendance at parent and family programs -Monitoring and Tracking - September to November 2018, Quarterly; October 2018 to May 2019, Monthly; October 2018 to April 2019, Weekly; October 2018 to June 2019, Twice-monthly October 30 to February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Danielson's Framework, I-Ready, F & P, Imagine Learning Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Design a theory of action to establish a vision of school improvement that utilizes concrete strategies with measurable expectations for all stakeholders to inform progress and support the academic and personal growth of students and adults. (1.4) o The school regularly celebrates students for exemplary attendance, academics and behavioral gains through monthly celebration assemblies to recognize student success. School leaders intentionally conduct over five special workshops and meetings such as town hall and principal coffee meetings for parents monthly to increase parental involvement. As a result, parental attendance and participation figures are the highest in the school's history and there have been no student suspensions so far this year. o The school exhibits a very positive and trusting environment as evidenced during all classroom visits and observations of teacher team work. School leaders promote school spirit by associating the school as the "Home of the Lions". Student Council members make frequent announcements, participate in Respect For All anti-bullying presentations, and organize school-wide Ten Acts of Kindness activities such as Breast Cancer walks and Asthma awareness events, thereby involving students in school and community improvement efforts. While these practices have enabled the school to establish a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes, the school has not developed a theory of action that uses stakeholder feedback and input to support progress towards the school's goals. As a result, current progress is not yet reflected in learning environment survey data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 2: By June 2019, all students and staff will participate in comprehensive social/emotional professional development resulting in a 3% reduction in the number of referrals to RTI for social emotional issues. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Establish the grade level leaders to support the coach  Purchase Junior Grade Books materials for K-5  Design implementation with content teachers of Social Studies and Science  Use Frayer and SIOP Strategies to increase academic vocabulary Lead Teachers Coaches Clusters Weekly, September 2018 – June 2019 Principals, Assistant Principals, Coaches, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Social Workers and Paraprofessionals  Establish listening centers with grade level text  Establish debate teams  Establish Protocols for Shared Inquiry  Provide schedules for implementation  Professional development with Jr. Great Book Shared Inquiry Consultant  Classroom Intervisitations  Teacher Rounds -Problem of Practice.  Pair teachers for support  Guided Literacy N/A Consultant Teachers Lead Teacher Coaches Clusters Consultant Teachers Lead Teachers Coaches Clusters Consultant Teachers Weekly, September 2018 – June 2019 Principals, Assistant Principals, Coaches, Teaches, Guidance Counselors, Social Worker, and Paraprofessionals Weekly, September 2018 – June 2019 Principals, Assistant Principals, Coaches, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Social Worker, and Paraprofessionals N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 18  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive training during our Tuesday Meetings, after school and on Saturdays. The will be provided with written materials in various languages that represent our school community. They will also be invited to visit and learn side by side in the classroom with their children through Open Houses and celebrations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. • Title I and AIDP Funds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ATS and Attendance Team Monthly Meetings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance Team daily protocol Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. There are multiple opportunities for teachers to engage in structured teacher team work. During these meetings, teachers analyze data and share best practices, Teachers meet consistently to discuss student work. There is a need to deepen the work of these teams, to improve problem of practice. Teacher Rounds and Professional Development will strengthen this area this year. This will result in an improvement of pedagogy resulting in consistency and coherence. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in professional development that includes opportunities for them to work productively with colleagues in teacher teams as measured by an increase of at least 20% of Effective Ratings on Component 3b Questioning and Discussion in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  N/A N/A N/A . N/A 1. Established grade level and teacher leaders 2. Schedule common planning and preparation periods 3. Teachers will meet in learning-groups to share best All teachers and related service staff Monthly workshops Administration, Consultants, and Teachers practices and analyze data. This sharing will build trust among colleagues which will increase student progress. 4. Study groups using Teacher Rounds as a text. 5. Collaborate with District 9 school for Teacher Rounds. 6. Collaborate with Tag for Shared Inquiry September2018 to June 2019. N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Ongoing activities throughout the year will highlight the collaborative work of the teachers and invite parents to participate. Classroom teachers will have class parents to help communicate to the school community. All stakeholders will be involved in this process. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 SWP, Fair Student Funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Focus observations and teacher reflections Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. All students benefit from Common Core aligned curricula across content areas that integrates the instructional shifts and builds coherence by engaging students in rigorous tasks, thereby promoting college and career readiness. The principal makes informed decisions to effectively upgrade technology, provide frequent structured teacher team collaborations, and establish after-school and Saturday enrichment programs to meet school goals and the needs of all students. The school has established effective systems for monitoring teaching practice with a focus on clear feedback and student work analysis to improve instructional practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 4: By June 2019, all teachers will plan lessons that focus on the reasoning exhibited by students during Shared Inquiry/discussions and challenge one another's thinking as measured by a 10% increase in Effective Ratings in Component 1e Preparation and Planning in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leadership will ensure instruction is aligned with the Danielson Framework that supports the implementation of the Common Core standards. Principals, assistant principals, teachers Supervisors, in collaboration with teachers, will develop individual professional development plan for each teacher. Principals, assistant principals, teachers Supervisory staff will meet individually with staff to review student data and develop plans for improving individual student achievement. (Fall 2018) Principals, assistant principals, teachers September to February 2019 September to November 2018 September 2018 to May 2019 September to February 2019 September to November 2018 September 2018 to May 2019 September to February 2019 September to November 2018 September 2018 to May 2019 2018-19 CEP 24 Administrative and Instructional team members will work collaboratively to set up a schedule and observation protocols aligned with Danielson competencies. Attendance records, agendas, and minutes from weekly planning sessions and professional development activities will provide evidence of staff progress Principals, assistant principals, teachers September to February 2019 September to November 2018 September 2018 to May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Ongoing parent meetings and sessions will provide information for the school community. Our active SLT and PA will also collaborate with the school. Monthly calendars, letters and automated phone calling will serve as vehicles for communication in languages that represent our school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Time for professional development, per session and per diem ● Scheduled time during the school day for individual conferences with each teacher and an administrator ● Scheduled time during the school day for individual conferences with each teacher and an administrator ● Scheduled time during the school day teacher observation and pre- and post conferences Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monitoring and Tracking - September to November 2018, Quarterly; October 2018 to May 2019, Monthly; October 2018 to April 2019, Weekly; October 2018 to June 2019, Twice-monthly; October 30 to February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 25  Teacher reflections and classroom observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. All students benefit from Common Core aligned curricula across content areas that integrates the instructional shifts and builds coherence by engaging students in rigorous tasks, thereby promoting college and career readiness. The principal makes informed decisions to effectively upgrade technology, provide frequent structured teacher team collaborations, and establish after-school and Saturday enrichment programs to meet school goals and the needs of all students. The school has established effective systems for monitoring teaching practice with a focus on clear feedback and student work analysis to improve instructional practices. The systems are aligned for student improvement and shared with school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase parental involvement by 5% as measured by attendance at meetings, workshops, trainings, PA and SLT meetings. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Trust: Teachers will meet with all students a minimum of once a week within a 4 week time frame in advisory groups, class meetings, small groups or one-to-one conferences. All parents, teachers, and students To increase parent involvement and engagement, the Guidance Counselors and Parent Coordinator will provide on-going parent workshops on supporting the social emotional needs of students. New Parent Orientation/Family Night/Open House for Parents The social-emotional team will meet weekly during professional development to research, develop, and implement strategies to address the students in greatest need of social emotional support. We will implement the Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Service school-wide. All parents, teachers, and students Monthly implementation of parental offerings Healthy Cooking Exercise All parents, teachers, and students August 2018-June 2019, ongoing Fall, Spring Day time workshops, breakfasts, evening events Ongoing, September 2018-June 2019 August-June, ongoing Fall, Spring Day time workshops, breakfasts, evening events Ongoing, September 2018-June 2019 August-June, ongoing Fall, Spring Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, selected teachers, attendance teacher, guidance counselors, pupil accounting secretary Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, selected teachers, attendance teacher, guidance counselors, pupil accounting secretary Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, selected teachers, attendance teacher, guidance 2018-19 CEP 28  Homework Support Parenting School Curriculum Student recognition events Attendance and Academic Awards Drama and Arts Performances All parents, teachers, and students counselors, pupil accounting secretary Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, selected teachers, attendance teacher, guidance counselors, pupil accounting secretary Day time workshops, breakfasts, evening events Ongoing, September 2018 August-June, ongoing Fall, Spring Day time workshops, breakfasts, evening events Ongoing, September 2018- 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. New York City Police Department and Fire Department, St. Barnabas, SCAN, New York Junior Tennis League Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 SWP Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, students will show a 5% growth in students meeting or exceeding grade level in English Language Arts and Mathematics as measured by the State Exams. The benchmark midyear indicators will be accessed using 2018-19 CEP 29  I-Ready, F&P, and Envision Math Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Surveys and Sign in sheets with Agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Bottom 3rd Mathematics Bottom 3rd Science Bottom 3rd Social Studies Bottom 3rd Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Strategic Reading, Guided Reading, Independent Reading, and Cloze Reading, I Ready, Waterford and Fundations. Strategic Math, Guided Math, Independent Math, I Ready and Envision Math Intervention. Exploration /Experimentations (FOSS) and Interactive Science Intervention. Passports Intervention. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Referral from Administration, parents and teachers Guidance Counseling with anti-bullying program andSAPIS Worker. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group, one-to-one, after school, before school and Saturday Academy. During the school day, after school, before school and on Saturday Academy. Small Group, one-to-one, after school, before school and Saturday Academy. During the school day, after school, before school and on Saturday Academy. Small Group, one-to-one, after school, before school and Saturday Academy. During the school day, after school, before school and on Saturday Academy. Small Group, one-to-one, after school, before school and Saturday Academy. During the school day, after school, before school and on Saturday Academy. Small Group, one-to-one. During the school day. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 92 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The students will be supported with basic school supplies, uniforms and necessary school materials. Students will be monitored and supported when necessary with counseling, At-Risk and enrichment services. They will also be able to attend our after school five day programs which provide academic, sports and arts support. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. School administration will work with DHR to ensure that all teachers are highly qualified, form partnerships with local colleges to identify new staff and attend Central borough wide hiring fairs. Professional development includes strategies for new teachers, mentorships with seasoned and experienced teachers partnering with New Teacher Center. New teachers are provided with Peer-Coaching, Modeling, Lab-sites Inter-visitations, Research Based Literacy. Teachers are provided information with training on site and off site. Observation cycles focus on effective strategies for practice as well as reflections. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High quality professional development for all stakeholders in the school community is aligned with student achievement and reflects the implementation of current system-wide reform initiatives. Professional development is provided for monolingual and bilingual/ENL staff. Through multidisciplinary planning, common preparation periods, and locally designed professional support are designed to Involve parents in their children's education through greater collaboration with teachers and other school staff, and increased engagement in the school's education program. The success of our high quality Professional Development is linked to the creation of Lab sites, Inter-visitations, Teacher Rounds, Peer-Coaching, Videoing and Reflecting on Best Practices. The Five Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions as well as Shared Inquiry Discussions have greatly impacted the growth of our Professional Community. We collaborate with Harvard, Teachers College, Early Reading Matters, New Teacher Center, I-ready, The National Training Network and the Junior Great Books Foundation. These have been a catalyst of change at Public School 58. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 CEP 34  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Transition to kindergarten involves inter-visitations to local day care and preschools and orientations for new parents, we are aligned with the preschool curriculum and prepare readiness activities and units to address the needs of the new students. We currently have two full day preschool classes. Teachers review the Pre-K for All Curriculum and adjust and align units of study to meet the needs of the students. Students are accessed and placed in classes following admission. Parents are encouraged to attend monthly meetings and school activities are designed to help parents support their children. Embedded in our program is a focus on social-emotional issues, that are addressed by a licensed Social Worker and an Early Childhood Consultant. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers teams work collaboratively to determine the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and professional development is provided to the entire staff. Our teacher teams and curriculum team meet to design and adjust curriculum. During the summer, reading, writing and mathematics units of study are revised based on the impact of the year's work. Teachers review data and plan support and enrichment programs. During common planning periods throughout the year, teachers continue to make adjustments based on the data. Administration and teachers plan an Assessment calendar for the entire year with baselines, mid-lines and end-lines. In addition, four benchmark assessments are included. School-wide review of I-Ready, F&P, Envision Math Assessments are monitored and tracked in Grades K-5. Writing in the content areas are assessed using rubrics and checklists and Portfolios. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 35  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 455,202.00 34,578.00 13,774.00 0 2,764,805 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 CEP 36   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 58X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. x058 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, School Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 39  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 58X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 40  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 42  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 80 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 4 4 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: 09X058 Language Instruction Program funded under Title III Rationale: Public School 58 is a PreK - 5 elementary school with a population with approximately 496 students. Approximately 26% of our student population are English Language Learners and Spanish is the dominant language. We are designing a rigorous supplemental program to better meet the needs of our English Language Learners. We have identified ENLs in Grades 2-5 as our targeted population. Attendance and progress will be monitored and tracked by the teachers and kept in our Title III Binder.. This year we will infuse technology by using the research-based computerized I-Ready Program. The Title III funds will help us purchase licenses for the ENL students that are invited to participate in our Title III Supplementary Program. Our Title III Saturday Academy students will receive one-to-one instruction through engaging activities specifically designed to meet their individual language acquisition needs in all four modalities. The various strategies the students will learn through the Imagine Learning Program will give them optimum opportunity to progress and make gains on NYSESLAT .We will use reports from the program to monitor and track student progress and plan next steps for the students in their language development. Saturday Academy teachers will collaborate and articulate with classroom teachers to ensure instructional continuity. Public School 58x’s Title III Supplementary Program will focus on vocabulary development in the content areas of Social Studies and Science to support second language acquisition. The focus groups are ENL students in Grades 2-5 who are required to take the NYSESLAT in April 2019. The ENL students in Grades 2-5 will be required to take the NYSESLAT in May 2019. Subgroups and Grade levels: Grades # Students Language Proficiency Levels Subgroups 2 18 Range from emerging to expanding Newcomers (Yrs 0-3) 3 14 Range from emerging to expanding Newcomers (Yrs 0-3) 4 26 Range from emerging to expanding Extension Services (Yrs 3-5) 5 19 Range from emerging to expanding Extension Services (Yrs 3-6) Total 77 Schedule and Duration: The Saturday Academy will begin in December 2018. The program will run for 14 weeks and each session will be four hours. The 2 bilingual certified and 2 ESL certified teachers will provide instruction to approximately 80 ENLs in grades 3 through 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 5. Group size will be maintained at 15 students per teacher. There will be 4 classes with a total of 80 students. Language of Instruction: English The students will receive instruction in a cross curricular program that addresses their area(s) of need and enhance students’ abilities in the areas of Reading, Writing, Speaking and Listening in English and native language support. The program will target ENLs at the entering, transitional and expanding language levels. The identified ENLs were selected from the NYSESLAT modality report. The Empire State NYSESLAT resource was selected to strengthen student’s oral literacy, social literacy, and academic language. The activities will be developed based on students’ need as determined by analyzing data including NYSESLAT, attendance and formative assessment data. Student work will drive the instruction program. The programs will be designed to help students achieve academic success aligned to Common Core State Standards and ESL Standards set for grade-levels and will support language development, reading, writing, and listening. Content area reading focuses on developing content area comprehension, critical thinking, vocabulary and the ability for ENL Students to read and understand nonfiction text features. Each lesson will include reading skills, comprehension strategies, and text features will help to increase student performance. The planning of the lessons will follow the format of Sheltered Instructional Observation Protocol (SIOP) model.This will include content and language objectives. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: PS 58‘s Title III Professional Development Program will primarily focus on how to use data to differentiate instruction, implement the I-Ready Program, NYSESLAT and integrate the SIOP framework to improve student achievement. Teachers receive training and topics: Certified Bilingual/ESL teachers and all teachers will attend workshops on the implementation IMAGINE LEARNING, the Empire State NYSESLAT and the eight components of the SIOP Framework, (Lesson Preparation, Building Background, Comprehensible Input, Strategies, Practice and Application). It will focus on Differentiated Instruction: Using Multiple Modalities for Language Development in order to provide high quality instruction to ENLs. The ultimate goals of the series are to promote an in-depth discussion about language learning principles and methodology with a focus on classroom applications. This training will be conducted by school staff Mr. Alberty, technology teacher and Ms. Perieria, coach and funded by Fair Student Funding and Title 1 SWP. Attendance of participants will be recorded and documented using a time clock, sign in sheets and reflection sheets. These documents will be maintained by the supervisor of the program as well as the participating teachers. . Schedule and duration: Additional professional development will include decoding test materials for ENLs. We will align instruction to the Common Core Learning Standards and our Saturday Academy will include 3 hours of instruction and 1 hour of professional development on an on-going basis. 2018-19 CEP 47  Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: To improve Parent Involvement of ELLs and support the instruction of students Schedule and duration: The Parent Coordinator and the ENL Coordinator will conduct activities to attract parents in addition to providing information that will encourage parent volunteers. Parents will have the opportunity to attend monthly meetings where they will be informed of upcoming events at the school level along with information on community organizations available to them. The I-Ready software will also promote parental involvement. Parents will be invited to meet and discuss Imagine Learning. We will explain the program and describe ways parents can help continue their child’s literacy education at home. The program generates progress reports in the parent’s native languages which the child bring home. The reports will itemize students ‘accomplishments and offer reminders of which skills students should practice and review at home. The software also generates materials to be worked on at home including vocabulary worksheets, letter worksheets, rhyming word books, sight word flashcards, and many other supporting pieces. Topics to be covered: Moreover, parent workshops will be conducted on such topics as child development, reading to your child in the native language, using the Public Library to promote Reading and Writing in English and Native Language. The parent involvement program will be provided at no cost to Title III. Name of Provider: Administration, Parent Coordinator, and Lead Teachers How parents will be notified of these activities Parents are notified via Phone Messenger Service, flyers, phone calls, and letters. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session 2018-19 CEP 48 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Public School 58 Borough Bronx School Number 058 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Velma Gunn Coach Rasheeda Chowdury ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Roma Francisco Teacher/Subject Area Damaris Rentas Teacher/Subject Area Deissdy Martinez Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Leticia Rodriguez Rosado Assistant Principal Arjune Ramdas Coach type here School Counselor Madeline Velez Parent type here Parent Coordinator LaTanya Harris Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 470 2018-19 CEP 50 Total number of ELLs 108 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.98%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 0 3 4 K 1 2 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 2 1 1 2 0 1 5 1 1 2 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 4 0 0 3 0 0 7 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The researched based assessment tools used to assess early literacy skills of our ELL students include Estrellita, TCRWP, Running Records NYC ELA Performance Tasks, writing baselines, mid-lines and end lines. The NYSITELL and the Spanish LAB are administered to identify ELLs. The TCRWRP is a formal assessment administered as a base line and end line, while the Fountas & Pinnel Running Records, and I- ready are ongoing assessment to use data generated to differentiate instruction to student’s level. Unit tests, checklists, rubrics and student works are used as assessments tools. The Reach National Geographic Program supplements and supports classroom instruction for our ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Running Records are tracked schoolwide a minimum of five times throughout the year to track students’ growth. Student growth trends are monitored to bridge gaps, push students and address lack of growth. End of Module assessments are reviewed to guide small group support to bridge gaps. Teachers meet in grade level teams to review assessment results and 2018-19 CEP 51  establish goals for students. The data gathered in grade teams and student goals are shared with supporting ENL teachers when collaborating to help plan instruction based on student needs. In addition, School leadership and teachers use the results of the ELL Periodic Assessments to facilitate student groupings, establish goals and develop instructional plans for our ELLs. Students are assessed twice, in October and March. These results will measure progress and proficiency. In addition, formative assessments, student work and student portfolios will be used to monitor and track performance The school is learning from the Periodic Assessments that we need to increase the oral language and listening skills to produce an increase in reading and writing through the use of rich challenging texts, multiple opportunities for students to express themselves orally utilizing strategies and skills that promote language development and academic literacy. We need to support and strengthen native language skills through the use of resources such as: Imagine Learning, Estrellita, La Cartilla, Senderos, Phonetica, and guided reading in Spanish. It also reveals that parents need workshops and professional development to support their children at home. iReady is used to supplement the curriculum. The data generated is used to create differentiated assignments for students within iReady. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ELL program is evaluated by consistently monitoring and tracking student's performance along with the effectiveness of ELL interventions and strategies used by the teachers. Ongoing assessments throughout the year and a variety of benchmarks; including IReady, REACH, Waterford and ELL Periodic Assessment, student portfolios and individual student goals are also used to further evaluate the success of our program. Unit tests, checklists, rubrics and student works are used as assessments tools. The Reach National Geographic Program supplements and supports classroom instruction for our ELLs. The NYSESLAT, NYC Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) performance tasks to measure student growth throughout the year. We currently use this assessment for ELA. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The results of the fall I ready and NYSESLAT are analyzed for grade wide and school wide trends to guide instruction throughout the year. Grade teams meet to review the data and plan instruction accordingly to meet student needs based on the data. Grade level leaders also meet to review the school wide trends that are shared school wide at staff development. ENL providers meet with teachers to review school data, class data and individual ELL data to support the classroom teachers and students they service. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Class data is collected through student assessment as stated above and student observation. Intervention begins with the classroom teacher and the language service provider. When determining RTI needs for ELLs, many factors are considered such as: program placement, date and grade of arrival, literacy in native and target languages, parent requests and concern and socio-emotional needs. Public School 58 will provide ELLs with rigorous, culturally responsive instruction, a strong Response to Intervention (RtI) model which includes: * a systematic process for examining how ELLs’ backgrounds and educational contexts (i.e., first and second language proficiency, educational history including bilingual models, immigration pattern, socioeconomic status, and culture) have an impact on their academic achievement in a U.S. classroom * an opportunity to examine the appropriateness of classroom instruction and the classroom context, based on knowledge of individual student factors * a regular plan for gathering information through informal and formal assessments; and nondiscriminatory interpretation of all assessment data. The 4 action steps below describe the process we follow: 1. UNIVERSAL SCREENING is administered to all students, TCRWP and I-Ready Online Assessments in Reading and 2018-19 CEP 52  Mathematics. As required by NY State rules and as a first step in a universal screening process, when a student enters a NYC public school for the first time, a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is completed. With this information, teachers can begin to uncover the factors that could influence the student’s English language learning process, thereby allowing this knowledge to guide linguistically responsive instructional choices 2. STRONG CORE (TIER 1) INSTRUCTION is delivered to all students in the general education classroom by qualified educators using the Performance Tasks, TC Units of Study, ReadyGen and Go Math. Strengthening classroom instruction (i.e., the instructional core), is a key step to supporting ELLs at-risk for or experiencing difficulties, as well as a critical step in fully implementing the RTI model. The structure of the lesson includes the Sheltered Instructional Observation Protocol Model, evidence of the Danielson Framework and Citywide Instructional Expectation. * Teachers and Students Producing Together * Developing Language and Literacy Across the Curriculum. * Making Lessons Meaningful. * Teaching Complex Thinking. * Teaching through Conversation. 3. INTENSTIVE, TARGETED INTERVENTION is provided to support ELLs who are not showing sufficient progress in the skills and/or competencies measured. ELLs receive instructional interventions that utilize strategies that are research-based with ELLs. Teams considering ELLs’ progress will utilize a problem-solving process and a body of evidence to make decisions. For ELLs, the documentation analyzed should include: * an explanation of how instruction was differentiated to address native and second language concerns and cultural differences * a description of the amount and type of ESL instruction * an understanding of whether or not native language support was used * a description of the amount and type of native language instruction (as appropriate) * an identification of instructional areas (specific skills and competencies) that need further, more intense intervention (Tiers 2 and 3), and; the extent, if any, to which ESL instruction and/or native language instruction is needed during Tiers 2 and 3 interventions to ensure the student will benefit from the intervention 4. PROGRESS MONITORING informs how at-risk students are responding to instruction. Progress monitoring data will be used to make educational decisions about changes in goals, instruction, and/or services; as well as whether to consider a referral for special education services. When progress is monitored, the expected rate of an ELL’s progress takes into account language development and background. Reference guide: Number of years of instruction in a bilingual education or English as a new language program English and home language literacy Content area and socio-emotional support needs of students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE) English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELLs Results on the annual English language proficiency assessment exam Bilingual education or English as a second language teacher recommendation Content area teacher recommendation 66 | E L L P o l i c y a n d R e f e r e n c e G u i d e Parent or guardian request Sample of student work in English and, if possible, in the home language Bilingual educational evaluation, if the student has or is suspected of having a disability 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELL to determine ELL status and proficiency NYSESLAT to determine ELL proficiency, proficiency changes and modality breakdowns Spanish LAB to determine student strength in their home language NYS ELA, Math and Science Assessment to determine student level in relation to grade level standards in content areas 2018-19 CEP 53  To determine which program is best suited for a student, data from the NYSITELl, NYSESLAT, EDAT and Spanish Lab are looked at closely to access if a student would perform better in a Transitional Bilingual Education Program, Dual language or Freestanding ESL program. After initial review of the data and orientation with the parent, the student is placed in a program according to the parent's choice. By monitoring the student's language acquisition through various assessments, including the ELL periodic assessment, TCRWP, and formative and summative assessments, it is determined if a student is making significant growth in second language acquisition. Students are provided with additional support, including after school programs, and targeted small group instruction to continue supporting them in their language development. Although we support program fidelity, if a parent requests to change the child from a TBE program to an ESL program, we evaluate the student's second language acquisition progression to determine if the child is ready for the all English Program and consult with the parent before final program changes are made. In addition, NYS ELA, Math and Science Assessment use to determine student level in relation to grade level standards in content areas. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Statewide assessments data is analyzed using the EDAT tool. ENL teachers share the data gathered from the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and EDAT tool with teachers through staff development, and one on one collaboration meetings with teachers they service to help plan instruction and address individual student needs. Currently we are awaiting 2016 test data. To ensure that content area teachers are supporting ELLs in building their English Language skills, all teachers are trained on gaining access to ELL data through various portals. Teachers are trained on how to identify which students are ELLs using EDAT, their proficiency levels on NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and their proficiency rating in the four modalities. With the data, teachers are then able to differentiate instruction and integrate literacy so that students are receiving support in the development of SIOP. SIOP is being implemented so that key vocabulary Tier 2 words are introduced weekly and teachers monitor the use of these words by students in the four modalities in the English Language. These words are also announced during the morning announcements so that all students receive exposure to the words throughout the day. Teachers also participate in professional development activities within the school that focus on differentiating instruction for students based on their various learning styles, needs and language acquisition levels. ENL teachers share the data gathered from the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and EDAT tool with teachers through staff development, and one on one collaboration meetings with teachers they service to help plan instruction and address individual student needs. Using the SIOP Model and researched-based programs in their native language provides access and multiple pathways for students to enrich and enhance their native language skills and English. Our Transitional Bilingual Program includes: Balanced Literacy in English and Spanish. Classrooms are equipped with English and Spanish libraries aligned with the thematically. Teacher have a native language arts program that supports the development of their second language acquisition, using multiple modalities and differentiated instruction. Teachers also use realia, picture dictionaries, visuals and technology. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a) At the present time, there are two Transitional Bilingual Education Bridge Classes in Grades 1/2/3 and 4/5 . Both classes are taught by certified Bilingual Teachers. Due to enrollment, we created a 4/5 Bridge Class and a 1/2/3 bilingual bridge class, based on the number of parents who selected TBE as a choice on the Parent choice form. Each program model is heterogeneously grouped, addressing the five language proficiencies; entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding. Transitional Bilingual Program(Spanish/English)- Based on our students' 2018-19 CEP 54  level of English Language and Academic Proficiency, the following program requirements are provided: Native Language Arts (NLA) instruction for students in Bilingual Classes, according to the CR-Part 154, the minimum required minutes of study as follows: -NLA for Bilingual: -entering/emerging-360 minutes per week –transitioning and expanding-180 minutes per week -60/40 (Spanish/English) model for entering and emerging, 50/50 transitioning , and 25/75 for the expanding (providing 1 Unit of ELA/!Unit of ESL) in Early Grades In addition, we have three self-contained ESL Classes, in Kindergarten and First Grade. These classes are taught by certified, experienced ESL Teachers. Integrated and standalone services are provided for ELLs who are in Special Ed., Collaborative Team Teaching and General Education settings. Students who are in Transitional Bilingual Education are in a self - contained classroom with a heterogeneous population that receives instruction in Mathematics in a 90 minute block. Literacy is taught in a 90 minute block as well. There are three self-contained ESL classes in grades K-2 where children are grouped heterogeneously by language levels. Each ESL program is taught by certified ESL teachers. At our school we have one ESL teacher that provides ESL instruction using the integrated model and the pull-out model for our ELL population in grades K-5 in both general education or special education settings. This model allows for the ESL teacher to support the classroom teacher scaffold the work in the classroom. Along with this program we have two bilingual classroom teachers serving the transitional bilingual population in grades 1-5. Each entering and emerging level child receives 360 minutes while the child in the transitioning and expanding level receives 180 minutes also commanding students get 90 minutes of integrated service. ESL methodology is also used to teach content areas in bilingual classrooms. b. TBE program. If applicable. Students who are in Transitional Bilingual Education are in a self - contained classroom with a heterogeneous population that receives instruction in Mathematics in a 90 minute block. Literacy is taught in a 90 minute block as well. There are three self-contained ESL classes in grades K-2 where children are grouped heterogeneously by language levels. Each ESL program is taught by certified ESL teachers. At our school we have one ESL teacher that provides ESL instruction using the integrated model and the pull-out model for our ELL population in grades K-5 in both general education or special education settings. This model allows for the ESL teacher to support the classroom teacher scaffold the work in the classroom. Along with this program we have two bilingual classroom teachers serving the transitional bilingual population in grades 1-5. Each entering and emerging level child receives 360 minutes while the child in the transitioning and expanding level receives 180 minutes also commanding students get 90 minutes of integrated service. ESL methodology is also used to teach content areas in bilingual classrooms. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our TBE program provides equal instruction in Spanish and English. Throughout the day, students receive language instruction tied to content to build capacity in both languages. The choice to build language skills within content areas, such as ELA and Math, allows TBE language teachers to reach the state mandates for service for their ELL population. It also ensures all students receive language instruction and literacy instruction in both languages. Native Language Arts (NLA) instruction for students in bilingual classes; according to the CR-Part 154, the minimum required minutes of study as follows: - NLA for Bilingual: -entering /emerging-360 minutes per week –transitioning/ expanding -180 minutes per week -60/40 (Spanish/English) model for entering and emerging, 50/50 transitioning, and 25/75 for the expanding (providing 1 Unit of ELA/!Unit of ESL) in early grades and .5 unit of study per week of integrated ENL in ELA core content area or other approved former Ell services for two additional years In addition, we have three self-contained ESL Classes, in Kindergarten, First, and fourth grades. These classes are taught by 2018-19 CEP 55  certified, experienced ESL Teachers. Integrated and stand-alone services are provided for ELLs who are in Special Ed others grades., Collaborative Team Teaching and General Education settings. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Daily instruction consists of a 90 minute block of literacy, 90 minutes of mathematics instruction, social studies and science instruction 2-3x weekly in a 45 minute block. Literacy: During the literacy block all students are taught phonemic, phonological, and decoding skills. Also children are taught writing skills and the conventions of print. Our literacy block has the following components: shared reading, read aloud, guided reading, independent reading and writing. Additional strategies that are also included are: cooperative grouping, scaffolding (i.e., modeling, thinking maps) and the use of learning centers. The classroom environments are designed to support and encourage risk taking and promote oral language for our ELLs with the use of word walls accompanied with pictures. Most of our teachers have received training in the SIOP model which includes different strategies to scaffold such as; verbal, procedural and instructional to ensure that instruction is comprehensible. Students in a Transitional Bilingual Education Program receive NLA if they are in at a beginning language level, and intermediate students. Mathematics: During the mathematics block, students are taught the prescribed topics aligned by grade. Teachers also use the SIOP teaching model to support the instruction for the ELLs that include verbal, procedural and instructional scaffolds to support and ensure comprehensible input. In addition students are grouped based on either the NYSITEL.L, NYSESLAT Spanish Lab, and EDAT for assessments in order to best provide instruction that is aligned to the linguistic needs of this population. Social Studies and Science Units of Study infuse SIOP to support language development. In all program models students are supported with modeling, visual supports, TRP, realia and home language resources such as translations and glossaries when teaching content. In grades Kindergarten to 4th ELA and math are provided by classroom teachers. The Freestanding ENL service providers collaborate with the content teachers to co-teach or provide content instruction outside of the classroom if the teacher holds common branch and TESOL certifications. Content is taught in English. Students are provided with glossaries and translations in their home language to help students understand the content while acquiring language. Visuals, and realia help students’ access new content. Work is modeled to set clear expectations. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? . We ensure that our ELL population is appropriately evaluated by utilizing the following assessments: Running Records, the ELE, the Math Spanish standardized exam along with the Science Spanish standardized exam. These assessments have baselines, midlines and endlines with benchmarks to monitor progress and establish goals and targets for the students. We use an On-line Data Tracking Systems, and Estrellita (Native Language) to monitor progress and plan instruction In the ENL program, ELLs are not evaluated in their home language across the year. They are assessed with the Spanish LAB and SIFE resources in grades 3-5 upon enrollment, but home language is used as a scaffold not for evaluation purposes in our ENL program 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. At present, we have four SIFE students enrolled; we ensure the following instruction will be provided if we have SIFE students: The use of sight words, picture dictionaries, low readability and high interest books in both the native language and in English, books on tape along with age appropriate materials which will support the student to meet the curricular demands. 2018-19 CEP 56  Also, teachers will create benchmarks and periodically review assessments in order to reinforce essential skills to ensure grade level performance. Students also use the following on-line programs- Waterford K-2, I-Ready K-5, and Imagine Learning K-5. b. The current plan at 58x for our newcomers is as follows. Those students in Kindergarten are provided support with a bilingual paraprofessional wherein they receive individualized and small group instruction to enhance their linguistic and academic learning experiences. B. Newcomers are provided with word banks and sentences frames to differentiate the work and make content more accessible. Shared reading is often used in small groups to build reading skills. In addition, two separate six-week ELL Saturday academies will be conducted to provide opportunities for students to sing, chant and read poetry to facilitate oral language in this population. The Saturday academy will include students in grades K-5. All ELL students receive differentiated instruction through small group work, peer collaboration, modeling, TPR, visuals, realia, translations and glossaries c. ELLs 4-6 years -- For our ELLs in this category we provide the following: rigorous instruction in literacy and math with the proper modifications to meet the needs of this population, use data to inform curriculum planning and instruction, and offer more opportunities for interactive writing in the content areas in English. Academic & ELL Saturday Academies to ELLs to help prepare them on other standardized exam. Moreover, students are assigned to small group instruction which includes direct instruction during extended day. d The long term ELLs, who haven’t made any gains in ELA and/or Mathematics, receive Academic intervention Services (AIS). AIS consists of any of the following depending on the identified need of the student: Fundations, Waterford, IReady, and/or Time for Kids Exploring Non-Fiction Kits that provide opportunities for students to support academic vocabulary. e. Former-ELLs Former ELLs continue to receive services for two additional year and test accommodations as per Chancellor's Regulations. They are also welcomed and encouraged to attend our ELL afterschool or Saturday Academy. A. Specific to our SIFE population instruction is tied to real life to give the academic work a sense of purpose and value for our SIFE students. Students are also given time to work collaboratively to foster community learning. . C. Developing ELLs use more advance sentence frames, word walls, vocabulary banks and oral rehearsal when writing. To build reading skills, partner reading is often used. D. Our school does not have many long term ELLs. It only applies to our 5th grade population. Our differentiation for this subgroup is to create focused individualized goals for students to bridge gaps in language skills and help students become more proficient. E. Former ELLs have access to differentiation mentioned above, but are at or near grade level and working towards independence with English language use. The focused instruction for this group is towards independence. They continue to receive testing accommodations for 2 years after attaining English proficiency. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? National Geographic REACH program is a science and social studies content area program and Santillana Spotlight on English that encompass many SIOP teaching scaffolds that helps students attain important content area information. Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond, and Common Core Support Coach Target Reading Comprehension are test sophistication resource that all ELL subgroups work with. This resource provides students with activities across the four language modalities (reading, writing, speaking and listening). Along with NYSESLAT test preparation this text provides ELA 2018-19 CEP 57  preparation for those ELLs in grades 3rd - 5th eligible to take the ELA. I-Ready is a web based program that is focused on literacy and mathematics. The program allows for differentiated instruction. I-Ready begins with a Diagnostic and monitors individual student progress throughout the year. Reports can be generated by the teacher to adjust instruction based on needs. For our ELLS who have received a proficiency level on the NYSELAT, we provide them with the tests accommodations mandated by the Chancellor, we provide AIS services and offer opportunities to participate in all of our ELL After-school and/or Saturday academies. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our bilingual special education students receive ESL instruction from a certified ESL teacher along with the assistance of an alternate placement language paraprofessional. The criteria used to place our ELLs-SWDs in ICT classes is based on results from formal, informal assessments, teacher recommendations, and IEP information. The curriculum reflects research based ESL and Special Education strategies and best practices through planning using Universal Design for Learning and Sheltered Instruction. Finally, we provide support for teachers with ESL integrated services which result in collaborative planning, articulation and support for teachers modeling appropriate scaffolds during instructional time. The teachers are working side by side developing effective instructional plans for the students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All interventions are delivered in English unless specified in a child’s IEP or within a dual language classroom. All teachers provide small group or one to one instruction for all students to assess and teach skills needed for intervention. When students continue to remain stagnant, they can be referred to RTI for additional support and discussed at PPT or SIT team meetings to help address student’s needs. As a school, each staff member has chosen 6 students to target for interventions during instructional time in their content area. Students were chosen based on state ELA and Math scores, as well as running record data in lower grades that do not offer state exams. Our cluster teaching staff opted to align themselves with ELL students to help target our growing ELL population. In addition, the targeted intervention services offered are RTI with Ms. Hoolan who helps push struggling readers up to grade level in small group instruction, and Ms. Sloan and Mr. Cardona who are specialist on special education (our SETTS teacher) who provide intervention in small groups for math and literacy. At this time we do not have additional service providers to target interventions in Social Studies; this is done by the classroom teacher. We are building and growing our out of classroom science program and are developing intervention measures for this subject area. We have ENL instruction across the content areas that give extra support for our ELLs to succeed in the mainstream curriculum. Many of these staff members are not able to speak the home languages of our diverse ELL population. When available assistance is given the native language to help support the student and assist intervention measures. Evidence of progress is always recorded. In the extreme case that interventions are not sufficient enough, a student may be referred to our Pupil Personnel Team that will then address the issues further and discuss referral options if appropriate. It is important to note that the small groups for RTI, ENL, and SETTS are flexible in that they change based on new data, new observations, new information, and evidence of progress. The hope is that the struggling learners (as identified by the data) will develop compensatory strategies and skills so that they can transition back into the mainstream classroom and outgrow the need for intervention services. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will introduce Jr. Great Books to deepen the work we have begun with Reciprocal Teaching in Spanish and English. This program will help students engage in questioning and student lead discussions. We will continue to work with I-Ready, Waterford and Imagine Learning on-line programs used in Grades K-5. I-Ready online interactive program is in literacy and mathematics. In addition, we will ensure that common planning involves collaboration among, ESL, Bilingual and Mainstream teachers whenever appropriate. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 CEP 58  .We still have a program 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are entitled to all school activities and are not excluded. Program scheduling is done considering student need to attend specialty classes, such as Art, Physical Education , Science and Technology. ENL providers avoid removing students from these school activities planning their instruction alongside specialties or during alternate times during the day. Our school offers a private after school program Scan and Tennis that are open to all students, including ELLs. We also offer a Title III afterschool program that focuses on specific ELL populations. ELLs have equitable access to the curriculum and school community. They are fully integrated into our school and participate in all activities inside and outside of the classroom. ELLs partake in all of our specialty programs including social studies, literacy through content areas, physical education, art, technology. At Grant Avenue, we have additional programs in place that enhance learning. The first is our AIS/RTI intervention specialist serves our ELLs and other at-risk, struggling readers in small groups. Our ELLs benefit from our Title III program that is heavily focused on implementing best practices for ELLs through the use of informational texts, technology, and thematic instruction. As a supplement and outside enrichment, our school takes field trips that are relevant to the curriculum including a neighborhood walk and a trip to the local library. This program teaches lifelong problem solving skills through read alouds and group activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. I-Ready and Waterford are technology based programs which target those ELLs at the beginning, intermediate and advance language levels. These programs are used with ELLs who have been identified to receive AIS services. I-Ready and Waterford provide students practice in individualized reading, math and science instruction within multiple contexts and emphasis on academic vocabulary to develop grade level comprehension skills. The oral portion of these programs promote language acquisition and vocabulary development. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program, ELLs are assessed in their home language the Spanish LAB and SIFE resources in grades 3-5 upon enrollment. As home language supports are provided and left unused, it is clear students need for home language support has lowered and confidence in English skills are growing. In the transitional Bilingual Language program students are assess in their home language with Running Records. Running Records are done in both Spanish and English so home language and target languages are evaluated throughout the year. The need for home language support 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and resources that correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels are provided in accordance to CR Part 154. The service support and resources include, but are not limited to books, picture dictionaries, classroom libraries and technology These are chosen and used according to student's age and needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For our newly enrolled ELL students, we provide them the opportunity to meet and talk to their teachers along with their parents at the time of registration if possible. Also, we provide a yearly curriculum night where students and parents are 2018-19 CEP 59  informed of the school’s expectations and available resources. Our Parent Coordinator and Pupil Accounting Secretary work closely with the families and provide information sessions as well as workshops. Parents are afforded opportunities to visit classrooms, take workshops and meet with teachers on a weekly basis. One of our Guidance Counselor's , Ms. Velez is bilingual and she provides services in and out of school for our families. The school conducts a community event at minimum one Saturday per month. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, we do not offer any language electives for our ELLs 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? At this time we do not have a Dual Language program in our school Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL personnel at our school have time to collaborate, share best practices and learn from each other. ELL personnel at our school encourage intervisitation and share video lesson to grow their practice. In addition to efforts within the school ELL personnel attend outside professional development offered through the district to build teaching practices and turnkey to staff and within their own team. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school offers multiple professional development around ELL specific needs for staff members to help them reach the 15% of mandated hours that are ELL specific: -mini courses - short workshops for teachers to learn more about ELL instruction - Monday PD time is allotted for all staff to review ELL data, notice trends to plan strategic instruction. - Election Day - best practices for ELLs, strategies for teaching ELLs Bilingual and ENL teachers attend workshops offered by the school, visit each other's classes, and workshops offered by the district to meet the mandated 50%. 2. As teachers engage in the Common Core Learning Standards, they will note what areas of development they need in order to meet the needs of the ELLs as the Common Core Learning Standards are incorported into the NYSESLAT. Once they have identified what development they need, according to the standards, professional development will be facilitated. 3.The 5th grade teachers, the counselor and administrators have several schools with which we have created partnerships. At least two times prior to the end of the school year, our students and parents attend meetings and workshops wherein they are informed of the expectations demands and resources of that specific middle school. 2018-19 CEP 60  4. Jose P training for all new teachers includes but is not limited to the following: o Introduce best practices for ESL instruction to all staff members o Introduce the NYSESLAT to all staff members o Introduce study groups that address differentiated instruction and incorporate and develop academic rigor in daily instruction for ELLs in their classroom o PD on ESL &/or NLA standards o PD on analyzing NYSESLAT data in order to drive instruction and differentiate instruction for ELLs Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? There are multiple ways families are informed of program goals, student NYSELAT results and proficiency levels, as well as student progress and needs. Teachers schedule one on one meetings, make phone calls, or send letters home to discuss individual students. For broader topics that are not student specific parents receive invitations to come to the workshop being offered. Additionally all families are welcome to come to speak with staff every Tuesday after school. Information sent home in writing is translated by staff or the translation service. For meetings over the phone or in person, teachers translate for themselves, find another staff member who speaks the family’s home language or use the translation call center. Phone calls or in person meetings are the preferred method of family outreach since providing written translations are not always possible. Paste response to question here: 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In order to increase the level of parental involvement, the Parent Coordinator will conduct activities to attract parents in addition to providing information that will encourage parent volunteers. Along with the ELL Coordinator, the mandated CR 154 parent orientation for parents/guardians of newly enrolled ELLs will be implemented. Also, a yearly curriculum night takes place to help parents have a better understanding of the curriculum and the school’s expectations. The parent room will also be available to parents on a daily basis. Parents will also have the opportunity to attend monthly PTA meetings where they will be informed of upcoming events at the school level along with information on community organizations available to them. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Velma Gunn, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 58 School DBN: 09x058 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Velma Gunn Title Principal Arjune Ramdas Assistant Principal Latanya Harris Parent Coordinator Roma Francisco ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Daniel Parent Mr. Reynoso-Bilingual Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Rentas-ESL Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Perierra N/A Coach Coach Ms. Velez School Counselor Ms. Rosario N/A N/A N/A n?a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09x058 School Name: Public School 58 Superintendent: LeiticiaRosari The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 64  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Month/Frequency Distributed How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely Name to Families provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 65  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 66 
