2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X066 School Name: P.S. 066 SCHOOL OF HIGHER EXPECTATIONS Principal: KEVIN GOODMAN 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 66 School of Higher Expectations School Number (DBN): 12X066 XXXXXXXXXXX Pre-Kindergarten to Grade 5 1001 Jennings Street, Bronx, NY 10460 718-319-2825 Fax: Email Address: kgoodma 718-319-2820 Phone Number: Kevin Goodman School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Kevin Goodman Paul Turci Tulsa Johnson Paul Turci ErsilaGonzelez n/a n/a n/a Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 12 Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Rd, Room 154, Bronx, NY 10460 Superintendent’s Office Address: jroasdo3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Phone Number: 718-328-2310 Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776 or 718-741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kevin Goodman Paul Turci Tulsa Johnson Ersila Gonzelez n/a n/a Monica DuBose *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lauren Cresci-O’Grady Member/ Teacher Wendy Guerrero Tulsa Johnson Rosa Cedeno Deajoune Dantzler Member/ Paraprofessional Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of P.S. 66 is to provide a supportive environment aligned with the Framework for Great Schools which promotes high expectations for all students. This will be achieved through a child-centered learning climate based on the utilization of data to accelerate student achievement. A partnership among parents, students, staff and community is integral to the success of P.S. 66’s mission. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Located in the South Bronx neighborhood of Crotona Park East, PS 66 was built in the same year as the original Yankee Stadium. Nearly a century of the history and culture of the South Bronx have passed through these school doors and halls. PS 66 is housed in a grand, well maintained, brick building that projects the potency of public education. The five-floor building is only accessible by stairs. The floors are tall and allow for high-ceiling classrooms that are well lit by large windows. The school is situated between residential and industrial land use, along the western flank of the Sheridan Expressway and the Bronx River. The neighborhood has recently seen an influx of affordable housing units built across the community. Increasing opportunities for students to engage in rigorous instruction continues to be at the center of the work staff engage in. This effort will permit us to experience further gains on summative and formative assessment results. The 2018 student achievement results indicate that 21% of students in Grades 3 - 5 met State standards on the State English test while 22% met state Standards on the State math test. This data reflects gains of 9% and 7% respectively when compared to 2017. The school is continuing to increase opportunities for teachers and all staff to collaborate at regular intervals. The rationale is that increased opportunities to plan, prepare, implement, and reflect collaboratively will lead to improved outcomes for students and staff. In addition, all staff are viewed as stakeholders charged with improving student outcomes heightening the need for collaboration to reach far beyond that of Teacher Teams. Paraprofessionals and Out-of-Classroom personnel continue to play a significant role in the greater school community. The staff includes many experienced teachers and a support staff including a crisis intervention teacher, a school counselor, two social workers, and a child psychologist. School leaders are strategically assigned roles and responsibilities to meet the needs of students, families, and staff. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Both students and staff reflect diverse backgrounds and personal experience. Children of immigrants sit side-by-side with children of third and fourth generation community residents. Longstanding community residents have witnessed more than one cycle of urban decay and revival. During the past 36 years, residential development and population growth in the school community have risen significantly, largely due to Federal Housing Programs begun during the Jimmy Carter Administration. While much improvement is visible, the community still relies on Federal Programs; for example, nearly all students are eligible for free school lunch. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Looking ahead, our focus areas will include: an additional ENL teacher to meet the growing demand for language acquisition services. The traditional bilingual classes will be considered along with a free-standing ENL program, featuring push-in service to reach a larger number of students. Academic Intervention Services (AIS) will be expanded to reach a greater number of students each day. In addition to the growth of students who are ELL we have also experienced a growth in our population of students who live in temporary housing (STH). This group of students now 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  makes up about twenty percent of our total student body, and as a result we will realign our school’s budgetary and personnel resources to address the needs of this unique population. Strong family and community ties will be addressed through strategic partnerships that address the following areas: nutrition, physical activities and crisis counseling in school. To promote a better awareness about food, we have established a partnership with The Food Bank for NYC. This partnership will bring two programs to PS 66: CookShop for Classroom and CookShop for Families. The result will be weekly classroom programs for 120 students and monthly family workshops for 25 - 35 families. In order to support increased opportunity for physical activity, we will continue our collaboration with the New York Road Runners Foundation, sponsors of the NYC Marathon. This collaboration brings the Mighty Milers program to students. This program involves teachers and students walking a mile once or twice a week to accumulate a minimum of 26.2 miles (official marathon distance). This program seeks to address childhood obesity and asthma. We will also again partner with Asphalt Green in 2018-2019 as P.S. 66 is the recipient of a Recess Enhancement Program (REP) grant that will provide students and staff with training and support to improve recess outcomes. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X066 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 669 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 48 48 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 34 30 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 87.4% % Reduced Lunch 14.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 70.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.17 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 21.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 77% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Black, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 64 62 89.2% 0.3% 20.8% 26.8% 0.9% 0.9% 6 0% 7.2 22.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. SOP(s) Addressed X X X X 3.3 3.4 3.5 The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The SLT conducted a review of available data, including: Jujne 2018 "Cut Scores," the 2017 School Performance Dashboard, the June 2017 Instructional Report, the 2017-2018 PPO Written Feedback Report, the published 2017 Quality Review, the 2014-2017 NYS Math Exam Item Analysis, and other student performance metrics. The trends in student performance are similar to that of the City and Peer groups. Overall, academic performance has shown the reality of the demands of Common Core Learning Standards and the increased rigor of the NYS Math exams during the 2017-2018 school year. This goal will be directed at improving student achievement. The 2017 student achievement results indicate that 21% of students in Grades 3 - 5 met State standards on the State English test while 22% met state Standards on the State math test. These percentages reflected an increase from the previous year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  If we develop, implement, and sustain a school-wide assessment calendar aligned with our adopted curriculum, the standards, and the NYS Testing Program, and we schedule frequent intervals for the purpose of different stakeholders to analyze results, plan instruction and progress monitor, then we will will be able to improve student achievement as measured by the Spring 2019 NYS ELA and Math Exam results. More specifically, we will increase ten (10) percentage points in students achieving Levels 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA and Math Exams when compared to Spring 2018 data as a result of this enhanced assessment and progress monitoring system. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). For 2018-2019, a continued partnership with the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project will continue to support state and district initiatives aligned with English Language Arts. Staff Developers will engage in cycles of work with administrators, the instructional coaches, and teachers. The school will create a Literacy Team and a Professional Learning Committee (PLC), that has representation from multiple grades to increase vertical planning and collaboration in order to ensure there are strong instructional structures and routines taking place throughout the school. Assessment tools will also be reviewed, revised, and adjusted to align with Next Generation Learning Standards. Teacher Teams will meet to work on sharing instructional best practices and training teachers to better align their lesson planning to Next Gen Standards. We will have this Teacher Team meeting time twice each month on Mondays, during the re-purposed extended-time. Students in grades 3, 4, and 5 will be targeted by this goal. However, as stated in goal 5D below, we will also target all students in Kindergarten, grade 1 and grade 2. Projected start date: July 2018. Expected end date: June 2019. Mentor participating in the D12-New Teacher Center Mentoring program will be utilized to support new and newer teachers implement curricula and instructional methods that are matched to the demands of the Common Core, performance based tasks and other assessments. We will utilize webinars, webcasts and on-site workshops to advance understanding and instructional practice. In addition, we will transform our instructional coaching staff's role to emphasize demonstration lessons that highlight best practices to both students and teachers on a daily basis. Observation cycles will examine the instructional techniques teachers are using to address the unique needs of Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners and other high-need student Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The Curriculum Team will consist of representatives from grades K-5 and Special Education, and it will begin work in July 2018. In order to complement the work of the Literacy Team, one teacher will be chosen to act in the role of instructional coach, and one will be selected to serve as Academic Intervention Specialists (AIS). Assistant Principals will provide ongoing support with curriculum mapping, professional development, and mentoring. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  groups. Professional Development cycles will address areas for growth. During designated time for Teacher Teams to meet, staff will plan accordingly for SWDs, ELLs, and other subgroups. Planning will include the development and implementation of differentiated instructional materials and techniques to support the unique needs of these students. Supports include but are not limited to, visual aides, front-loading content specific vocabulary, building background knowledge surrounding content using varied resources, modifying prompts and instructions, etc. Teachers will also plan for small groups of students in advance to provide adequate access to grade level content. Frequent workshops will be conducted for parents to deepen their understanding of grade specific demands in ELA, Mathematics and other content areas. Families will have an opportunity to immerse in content children encounter. In addition, opportunities will exist where families engage in activities that have been historically deemed rigorous, i.e., 25 math questions as opposed to one math question that crosses multiple standards requiring students to show their thinking using a repertoire of strategies. Families will learn how to help students navigate tasks of this nature on their own. These sessions will cover content areas across the year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Instructional Coaches and support staff, i.e., the Reading Recovery Teacher will conduct workshops that support families with the tools and resources necessary to promote more positive reading behaviors beyond the school. Specifically, the school will collaborate with the parent body on incentives that will increase levels of participation regarding essential elements of this initiative. For example, students who hold a certain number of reading logs signed by an adult family member after a determined interval will be eligible for rewards. In addition, the school and the parent body will collaborate on different events over the course of the school year that promote positive reading behaviors, such as a family read aloud evening where staff, families, and older students read to other students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators will work to foster collaboration among all teachers and ensure adequate oversight and supervision of Paraprofessionals, instructional coaches and AIS staff assigned to meet this goal. Administrators will reserve in the school budget and direct funds to hire and place staff where needed to meet this goal. One instructional coach and 1 Assistant Principal have been identified to facilitate the work required for full implementation of the D-12 New Teacher Mentoring program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By late February 2019, 30% of our 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade students eligible to take the NYS ELA Exam will perform at or above grade level on a Simulation NYS ELA Test provided by the Ready NY instructional materials the school commits to using. These assessment results will drive literacy instruction leading up to the NYS ELA Exam. We will use Running Record assessments, locally produced assessment and simulated State ELA Exams to gather data on student performance. The data we gather from the simulated ELA Exam will be used to prepare a summary that will compare student test data from 2017 to 2018 and eventually 2019. If our data shows we have not shown improvement in the number of students reaching Level 3, we will revisit the instructional strategies we are using. The Principal, Assistant Principals and instructional coach will facilitate quarterly data reviews with grade level teams based on progress from baseline toward target on key ELA indicators. The instructional coach, data specialist and school leaders will meet monthly to review progress of students, analyze data, and make recommendations for adjustments to instructional routines. All teachers will utilize a coordinated system of assessments and intervention to meet the needs of all students and to monitor progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured using Running Record assessments, locally produced assessments, and simulated NYS ELA Exams. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Two significant challenges that we face are: 1. Our student population suffers from a high rate of transfers; 2. We have a large percentage of students in temporary housing, 20% of the population. The ongoing turnover of students results in ever-changing student dynamics and class sizes. The need exists for a new approach to handling the transition of students. In seeing this trend we will realign funding, staff and programs to meet the unique needs of the students and their families. There were 200+ reported incidents this year, according to Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) data. This number of disciplinary occurrences at PS 66 is incongruous with the spirit and mission of the school. A “Dignity for All” anti-bullying program will be implemented using in-class lessons across all subject areas. The school will select three staff members to provide professional development to teachers and follow-up during the school year. A final concern is the delicate balance between the available space within the building and the competing needs of two schools. Fannie Lou Hamer Middle School is situated on the fifth floor of the school building, and their needs present difficulties in scheduling and use of common spaces such as the auditorium, cafeteria, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  science laboratory and library. Scheduling and staffing at all common areas needs to be reviewed by both schools to ensure the most effective use given the respective student populations at each school. We recognize that events within and beyond our school community serve as learning moments on our path to understanding and success. Cultural awareness, respect and sensitivity are key elements in the development of children, yet these elements are often forgotten or minimized in order to meet the demands of academic progress within limited time and resources. We seek to improve the social and emotional health and well-being of our student population. We have looked at District 12 data, our school data and City-wide statistics regarding student suspensions and events involving confrontation and bullying. This goal seeks to redirect attention, time and resources to a critical, under-served area in the school community. This has lead to the adoption of a social emotional learning curriculum for Grades K - 5; the 4R's facilitated by Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. If we develop, implement, and sustain a school-wide PBIS Plan that is created collaboratively and monitored bi-weekly by a PBIS Team that is comprised of different stakeholders across the school, then we will be able to more strategically recognize those students demonstrating exemplary behaviors as measured by a school-wide matrix while supporting a subgroup of students who require increased levels of social emotional learning and intervention for the purpose of maintaining a school climate that is conducive to students enjoying increased levels of achievement. More specifically, we will reduce the amount of time students spend outside of class and the number of OORS Reports generated thru June 2018 by 50% when compared to June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All school staff will be involved in the implementation of these strategies as indicated in the action plan. The Principal will ensure that adequate time and budgetary resources are available to support this goal. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? All students in grades Pre-K to 5 will be included. Program start date: September 2018. Program end date: June 2019.  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Strategies to address this goal will involve the following elements:  A PBIS Team was established in June 2018 to develop a plan for the implementation of systems and structures that address school wide behavioral expectations.  The school will grow the 4R's Social Emotional Curriculum to include all grades; K-5.  A School Counselor or Social Worker will visit every classroom on grades K to 5, at least once per month, to conduct a full-period lesson/discussion on social responsibility, character development or anti-bullying.  Cluster Teachers work together to ensure that, at least once per month, every class on grades K – 5 is presented with a lesson or activity that addresses one of the following areas: team building, becoming a good winner/loser, working together, playing together, sharing or taking turns;  Classroom Teachers will set aside at least one period per month to conduct cooperative learning games that require teamwork, turn-taking and healthy competition.  Assistant Principals will develop school wide themes to incorporate writing, speaking, art, music and drama into presentations/assemblies for the school community; these themes will be shared in a letter for students to share with their parents/guardians so that families have the opportunity to become involved.  Workshops will be conducted periodically for families to understand the PBIS system utilized as well as the systems in place to manage student behavior in addition to deepening their understanding of the Discipline Code. A commitment by the Parent Coordinator and SLT will be made for families to reflect on the strengths and areas for growth with the revised practices in place to address student behavior. Designated Parent Engagement time on Tuesday will be utilized when possible to engage more families in conversations and opportunities to strengthen the school- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  home partnership. For example, some teachers will be asked to facilitate sessions that meet the needs of P.S. 66 families. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our PBIS Team and Director of School Culture will design and facilitate sessions at intervals across the fall to familiarize families with the PBIS Program and 4R's Curriculum as well as revised systems and structures surrounding the schools approach to student behavior aligned to the Department of Education's Discipline Code. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principals, Social Workers and teachers will review programs such as, Foundation, Edutopia, Respect-For-All, and others in order to determine the most appropriate materials, activities and lessons for each grade. Assistant Principals will acquire the most effective and appropriate materials, and they will ensure scheduling and staffing are aligned to support this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A summary of OORS (Online Occurrence Reporting System) Reports is required to be presented at each monthly Safety Committee Meeting. The data collected in OORS data will be shared and analyzed by the Safety Committee and also with SLT core members each month. Monthly OORS data for the current school year will be reviewed in November 2018, and again in February 2019. This data will be compared to similar data from the previous school year, exactly 12 months prior. The expectation is that we are on track all year long to reduce the number of OORS Reports that are required to be entered following NYC DoE expectations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured using the OORS Incident and Suspension data from the Safety Committee. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School leaders analyzed data from the Advance system alongside the District 12 TDEC to review observation data and completion rates indicating that more frequent cycles of observations need to occur earlier in the school year so instructional practices positively impact student achievement. The SLT reviewed the PPO 2017-2018 Written Feedback, the June 2018 Instructional Report, The 2016-2017 School Performance Dashboard and other sources of data including, Fountas & Pinnell (reading assessments) and MOSL related data to determine the academic and student performance priority needs. In addition, the SLT conducted a local school-wide survey of both staff and parents, and we reviewed the NYC DOE school environment survey 2017 & 2018. Our findings suggest that there has been an emphasis on grades 3, 4 and 5, due to the overstated importance of NYS ELA and Math test score results. Over the years, to improve the test results, our school has steered more resources, talent and attention to grades 3, 4 and 5. In order to meet the demands of the new Common Core Learning Standards all grades are equally important to a school’s success. As such, instructional rigor, classroom support, academic intervention services and teacher development must be balanced across all grade levels, in particular, before the end of second grade. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. If we develop, implement and sustain multiple cycles of professional learning aligned with student assessment and teacher evaluation data in collaboration with already established partnerships such as the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project for Reading and Writing and Generation Ready for Mathematics, then we will be able to build greater instructional coherence across the school leading to increased levels of student achievement. More specifically, 90% of teachers rated using Advance will experience an Effective rating before March 2019 aligned with Component 4e; Growing and Developing Professionally. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). An emphasis on Grade Team functions and frequency of meeting will increase common planning and collaboration in order to ensure there are consistent instructional practices and routines taking place throughout the school. Assessment tools will also be reviewed, revised, and adjusted to align with CCLS. The PLC will meet to work on sharing instructional practices and training teachers to better align their lesson planning to CCLS. We will have a monthly PLC meeting time during the re-purposed extended-time. Training will be conducted on reading strategies, how to better use all components of the F&P assessment tool, how to incorporate technology into reading lessons, using Balanced Literacy to support reading instruction, and other academic intervention strategies for Paraprofessionals. All students in second grade will be targeted by this goal. Projected start date: September 2018. Expected end date: June 2019. We will utilize webinars, webcasts and on-site workshops to advance understanding and instructional practice. In addition, we will transform our Staff Developers role to emphasize demonstration lessons that highlight best practices to both students and teachers on a daily basis. The Staff Developer and the Mentors participating in the D 12 -New Teacher Center Mentoring program prepared to support teachers with this goal. Sessions will be developed for families by school staff for the purpose of promoting best practices aligned with supporting Independent Reading at home. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers, including ICT and Special Education, will be involved in this goal. In order to complement the work of the PLC Team, one teacher will be chosen to act in the role of instructional coach, and three teachers will be selected to serve as Academic Intervention Specialists (AIS). Assistant Principals will provide ongoing support with curriculum mapping, professional development, and mentoring. Educational Assistants (Paraprofessionals) will be trained to support reading instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners and other high need student groups will be supported using Guided Reading instructional techniques to support reading growth across the school year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will share specific instructional techniques that have been developed and implemented for student subgroups during targeted Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement time and during November and March Parent Teacher Conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A designated Staff Developer supporting the partnership with the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project is charged with supporting teachers in developing and implementing best practices aligned with reading instruction. Teachers across all grades have at least one common preparation period per week for the purpose of collaborative planning and preparation. Classroom Libraries across grades will be refreshed to ensure books match student levels and interest. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data generated using Advance will be reviewed and analyzed at frequent intervals alongside the District 12 TDEC to monitor teachers ratings in components 1a and 1e so that targeted professional learning can be developed and implemented for teachers rated developing or ineffective at any point during the first two observation cycles conducted by school leaders. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured using periodic Fountas and Pinnell Running records and 1:1 reading conferences. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The SLT reviewed the PPO 2017-2018 Written Feedback, the 2017 June Instructional Report, the 2016-2017 School Performance Dashboard and other sources of data including, Fountas & Pinnell (reading assessments) and MOSL related data to determine the academic and student performance priority needs. In addition, the SLT conducted a local school-wide survey of both staff and parents, and we reviewed the NYC DOE school environment survey 2017 & 2018. Our findings suggest that there has been an emphasis on grades 3, 4 and 5, due to the overstated importance of NYS ELA and Math test score results. Over the years, to improve the test results, our school has steered more resources, talent and attention to grades 3, 4 and 5. In order to meet the demands of the new Common Core Learning Standards all grades are equally important to a school’s success. As such, instructional rigor, classroom support, academic intervention services and teacher development must be balanced across all grade levels. This goal seeks to build on the Mayor’s Universal Pre-Kindergarten programs by creating capacity to meet a better prepared group of students in the near future. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. If school leaders are able to accelerate the rate at which observation reports are completed, raise the level of actionable feedback provided to teachers and progress monitor, then they will be able to provide all teachers with the resources necessary to enhance their practice early enough in the school year to positively impact student achievement. School leaders will complete (fifty) 50% of the required observation reports using Advance before December 31, 2018 and (one-hundred) 100% of the required observation reports by March 29, 2019. More specifically, the accelerated pace of report completion and the more targeted feedback will result in improved ratings aligned to Component 2a: Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport and Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ** By directing effort and resources to our neediest students throughout grades K-5, student academic growth will develop more fully, and students will be better prepared for the challenges and stamina required to meet the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). The primary components of our strategy include: This goal will target all students in Kindergarten through fifth grade. Work on this goal will begin in July 2018 and end in June of 2019.  Provide training on Fundations and Balanced Literacy/Guided Reading and other academic interventions to Paraprofessionals, who will serve as AIS in Kindergarten;  Assign a Staff Developer to conduct demonstration lessons and provide assistance in aligning instruction to CCLS; and  Provide Academic Intervention Service (AIS) teachers to work in classrooms on Grades 1-5 daily with small groups of students and keep detailed AIS records as required.  One Staff Developer and one Assistant Principal will facilitate the D 12 - New Teacher Center Mentoring Program. Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners will be included in the primary AIS target population comprised of Level 1 students in Grades 4 & 5 as per State test results.   One on one sessions will be facilitated to support families regarding the implementation of AIS. AIS providers will engage with families during Parent Teacher Conferences in November, March and May. AIS providers will develop Progress Reports for families and engage them in dialogue regarding student progress during designated Parent Engagement time on Tuesday afternoons. This will include specific steps that can be taken to reinforce areas for growth identified during the school day, i.e. building math fluency through regular practice. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) We will use a minimum of one certified teacher to form our AIS service team, and they will work in the classrooms with small groups of students who have been identified as needing additional instruction or academic support. We will maintain a team of 3 teachers with ENL qualifications to work with ENL students. We will designate one certified Special Education teacher to provide SETTS services where required by IEPs. We will assign one Staff Developer to work with teachers who service grades K-5. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will share specific instructional techniques that have been developed and implemented for student subgroups during targeted Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement time and during November and March Parent Teacher Conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School leaders will work to foster collaboration among all teachers and ensure adequate oversight and supervision of Paraprofessionals, coaches and AIS staff assigned to meet this goal. Administrators will reserve in the school budget and direct funds to hire and place staff where needed to meet this goal. The New Teacher Center Mentors are also instructional coaches paid using Title I Funding. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School leaders will use data shared by the District 12 TDEC to assess and refine frequent cycles of observations that occur. This data will include monthly reports providing completion rates shared via email. School leadership will use the data during regularly scheduled team meetings to plan immediate next steps. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured using the SLT Teacher Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. **Family engagement has a direct and positive effect on students’ achievement and is the most accurate predictor of a student’s success in school. A child’s first teacher is his or her parent/guardian. In the Spring of 2017, the SLT prepared and distributed a local survey to assess parent/guardian sentiment. In addition, the SLT reviewed the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey results. The elements we seek to address, by increasing parent involvement and communication within our school, are to improve the level of literacy, language preference, daily commitments, availability and educational resources within the school community. By accomplishing this we can respond better to parents'/guardians' needs, expectations of their child/children and develop more volunteers . Summary of strengths:  Parents/guardians and teachers work together to improve student learning and progress;  Parents/guardians are willing to become involved in school improvement projects;   The school budget is sufficient to expand funding to support increased parental involvement. School leaders are supportive of parental involvement; and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Summary of needs:  Parents/guardians need more help in understanding the new requirements of Common Core Learning Standards;  The school community contains a large percentage of parents/guardians who are in transitional housing or living with relatives (STH);  Pathways to useful parent/guardian involvement are currently limited within the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. If we are able to increase the number of partnerships the school has with outside organizations across Grades K - 5 and we are able to leverage those partnerships to increase parent involvement across the school, then we will be able to foster stronger home-school relationships resulting in 95% or parents reporting that the school offers a wide enough variety of courses, extracurricular activities and services to keep their child interested in school as measured by the 2019 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Conduct ongoing surveys of parents’/guardians’ needs and parent/guardian workshop evaluations. ● Provide multiple parent information sessions based on the ongoing and yearly surveys. All parents and guardians Starting September 2018 Ending June 2019 ● Communicate data collected from surveys with flyers, school web based app and phone calls to reach more parents. ● Offer Learning Leaders training and ELL classes to demonstrate how parents/guardians can help their children with learning needs and enable themselves as partners in their Education. ● Conduct Parent support groups by having weekly Parent’s/guardian’s discussion about health, mentoring their children, special education needs. ● Provide PSA discussions, SLT minutes and school newsletters for parents/guardians. ● Teach parents how to create routines to enhance study habits at home for their children by introducing the Parent/Guardian Action Plan. ● Develop a web-based information site that can also be accessed using cell-phone/smart phone application technology; this site will allow rapid dissemination of information about newsletters, school events and opportunities within the school community. ● Participation in the CookShop for Families program, sponsored by the Food Bank for NYC, which provides monthly activities at PS 66 for parents/guardians to learn new recipes and make nutritious meals and snacks. ● Provide parents/guardians opportunities to participate in activities with their children at school, such as: assemblies and Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Work on this goal will be orchestrated by the office of the Parent Coordinator. School administrators will oversee scheduling events and implement workshops/meetings. Select teachers will also implement workshops and meetings. The Learning Leaders will provide formal training and assistance with parent/guardian certification. Key personnel including but not limited to the Parent Coordinator, School administrators, teachers and social workers/guidance counselors will work towards achieving this goal. School administrators will adjust the schedule and provide instructional resources. Outside resources such as 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  school performances, family fitness day, open school night and field trips to local institutions. ●Sub groups of students where attendance is most critical, such as SWDs, ELLS, students performing in the lowest one-third, etc. will have their attendance monitored closely over the course of the school year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Learning Leaders, Bank Street College and New York City cultural institutions will be utilized. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The school partnered with Mosholu Montefiore Community Center (MMCC) in January 2018 to facilitate a comprehensive 5 day a week after school program as a result of our participation in the Empire State Grant, written in July/August 2017. This program will continue through fall 2018-2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A designated Family Worker will act as the liaison for all Family Engagement. Additional staff such as Instructional Coaches, our Guidance Counselor, Social Workers, etc. will facilitate sessions for families aligned with their area of expertise, i.e. supporting Independent Reading or social-emotional growth. Teachers will be provided with flexibility using designated Tuesday Parent Engagement time for the purpose of facilitating purposeful opportunities for families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Attendance records that capture family participation in fall activities will be analyzed in November 2018 again in winter 2019 and then in the spring. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Progress will be measured by Meeting/Workshop Sign-In sheets and other attendance records. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS Exam Data, Fountas and Pinnell, unit assessments, and teacher observations NYS Exam Data, unit assessments, and teacher observations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fundations (double dosing), Fountas and Pinnell Academic Intervention program, guided reading Reteaching, teaching of remedial Math skills, Unit assessments, and teacher observations Unit assessments, and teacher observations Referral made by Child Study Team, teachers, administrators and/or parent/guardian Repeated readings, technology use and reteaching Repeated readings, technology use and reteaching At risk counseling, Pupil Intervention Plans, Behavior Intervention Plan Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group One to one Small group One to one Small group Small group Small group One to one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day for five periods per day, after school and Saturday academy During the school day for five periods per day, after school and Saturday academy During the school day During the school day During the school day, after school and Saturday academy 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) As of October 2018, there are 123 students in temporary housing (STH) at PS 66. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide counseling and other related services by our staff of social workers. We will maintain close communication with the Office of Youth Development to support student activities and events. We will reach out to local community organizations, such as the Children's Aid Society, to develop and support afterschool programs for our STH population. We will create a team of PS 66 staff to develop and support afterschool programs. We will also submit an application to the Food Bank for NYC to arrange for food donations to our neediest STH families. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Members of the hiring committee will attend job fairs to recruit HQ teachers   New teachers will receive extra support from administrators, support teachers (Coach/AIS.)  First year teachers will be assigned a mentor to work with at least two periods a week. Mentors will periodically log in specific support provided. Invite new prospects to visit our school community and take a tour.  All teachers will be encouraged to attend outside professional development on an ongoing basis.  Ongoing professional development, lunch & learns and study groups offered during and after the school day.  Common Planning times scheduled to promote collaboration and support amongst teachers.  Participation in the D-12 New Teacher Center Mentoring program will be facilitated by the two instructional coaches and one Assistant Principal 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Maintain staff development committee to identify areas of interest and need of all staff  Utilize data collected by staff development committee to offer differentiated professional development   Ongoing professional development, lunch &learns and study groups offered during and after the school day.  Participation in the D-12 New Teacher Center Mentoring program will be facilitated by the two instructional Intra-grade and inter-grade visitations (instructional rounds) coaches and one Assistant Principal  Teacher recruitment will begin in late winter and will begin with aggressive outreach to the strongest local colleges and universities, i.e., Columbia, NYU, City College, Hunter College, etc. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). ● Four Pre-Kindergarten classes are available to better serve the community. ● Our Pre-Kindergarten support team consists of a designated Assistant Principal, Family Worker, and Social Worker, 4 classroom teachers and 4 paraprofessionals. ● Pre-Kindergarten and Kindergarten teachers meet regularly to collaborate and align curriculum. P.S. 66 implementing portions of Creative Curriculum to increase rigor in the classroom. The school takes advantage of Central Office personnel to strengthen all aspects of Pre-Kindergarten at the school. ● Pre-Kindergarten teachers regularly participate in professional learning opportunities alongside all teachers to familiarize themselves with the demands of K-5 curriculum. ● In June, Pre-Kindergarten teachers share records and information of any students attending Kindergarten at P.S. 66 the following fall. ● Parent involvement activities facilitated by the Pre-Kindergarten support team will encompass both Pre- Kindergarten and Kindergarten parents/guardians. Pre-Kindergarten students and families are included in all school events (i.e. assemblies) and have access to the same resources (i.e. Parent Coordinator) as the rest of the school. Social Workers and the School Counselor routinely support Pre-Kindergarten Families alongside the Pre-K Assistant Principal and Pre-K Family Worker. ● A designated Social Worker, the Parent Coordinator and an Assistant Principal will facilitate a Workshop for incoming Kindergarten families that will aim to identify techniques and routines to better prepare students for the transition from Pre-Kindergarten to Kindergarten in Spring 2017. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  ● Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) Committee consisting of 3 Assistant Principals, UFT Chapter Leader, and 3 teachers will continue to share information on possible student assessments with staff members ● The Principal, 3 Assistant Principals and teachers will facilitate quarterly data reviews by grade level ● During these data reviews teachers will have an opportunity to provide feedback regarding the assessments used ● Professional development sessions to support teacher practice will be based on student needs’ identified during these data reviews ● Practice/simulated tests will be administered throughout the year ● Teachers will grade students’ exams to evaluate the effectiveness of the assessment tool, students’ progress, students’ needs ● Weekly teacher-team meetings will focus in on various types of assessment measures and team planning utilizing the assessment results 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X N/A X X X N/A Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A 5D,5E N/A Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 600,525.00 0 117,742 174,761.00 12,366.00 0 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 4,314,673.00 X 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 66, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 66’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance PS 66’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  PS 66 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, PS 66 will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 66 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between PS 66 and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments., Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act. Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Approximately Rationale: Based on the 2017 NYSESLAT results which is the most current available data, 81 ells took the NYSESLAT. Twenty nine students have advanced one proficiency level, four advanced 2 proficiency levels, and 23 remain at the same proficiency level. On the other hand, 7 students regressed by one or two proficiency levels and 8 tested on the commanding level. The remaining number of students graduated. We have observed that the ells struggled in the area of writing. As such, at 12X066, one of the Title III focus will be all four of the NYSELAT modalities with a special attention to writing. This program activity will run in an after school program for 10 weeks on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30-4:30 pm starting in November 2018 through April 2019. Three certified ENL teachers will provide instruction to ells in grades 2-5. Students will be grouped in grade bands and instruction will be differentiated based on proficiency levels. Based on the ELA and Math data, none of the ells in testing grades scored at grade level (level 3). About 79 percent of the ELLs scored at level 1 in ELA, and the remaining at level 2 and 93 percent remaining scored at level 3 in Math. As a result, 12X066 will target ELLs students in grades 2-5 in a Saturday Academy program focusing on ELA and Math as well as English Language Development. The Saturday Academy will begin in January 2019 and will run through April. The program will meet from 9:00 A.M. to 12:00 PM. The language of instruction will be English with native language support. The 3 teachers providing direct instruction are Certified in either ENL(1) and Bilingual Education(2). We will also have the school Social Worker working/supporting our students. The students will be grouped by grade level: group 1 will grade 2, group 2 will be grade 3, and group 3 will be grades 4/5. Students will receive instruction for one hour each in ELA, Math, and Language Literacy (ENL). We will use programs such as iready through technology, Reach into Phonics books, we will continue to follow the TC curriculum for reading and writing as well as Go Math and Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT book. Students will also follow the 4r's (Reading, wRiting, Respect, and Resolution) from Morning Side Center. Attendance will be monitored and kept on file with the school secretary. The school will compliment the cost of the program using other funding sources. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: To provide professional development for teachers working with LEP/immigrant students, teachers of limited-English-proficient students, ESL teachers, administrators and educational personnel. One representative per grade. The schedule and duration of the professional development is as follows: Staff will meet on the second Tuesday of every month. The time of the professional development sessions will be 1 period which consists of 45 minutes. PD's are based on D12 Professional Learning Series Strategies along with 50 Strategies for Teaching English Language Learners by Adrienne L. Herrell and Michael Jordan. This book is a user friendly teacher's guide to engage all students in their lessons specifically targeting all enl's. • Providers for the professional development consists of four members, 3 ESL providers: Alexia Mendoza (4th and 5th grade), Doris Munoz-Lopez (2nd and 3rd grade), Teresa Lee (K and 1st grade), and Yvette Lopez Assistant Principal. Some of the Topics to be Covered: Opening New Doors for Ells: Supporting and Challenging New Language Learners (Session 1) Date: Monday, October 1, 2018 2:30-3:30 Presenters: Mrs. D. Munoz-Lopez, Ms. Alexia Mendoza, and Ms. Teresa Lee Opening New Doors for Ells: Supporting and Challenging New Language Learners (Session 2) Date: Tuesday, October 9, 2018 2:30-3:30 Presenters: Mrs. D. Munoz-Lopez, Ms. Alexia Mendoza, and Ms. Teresa Lee Strategies to support Ells (Session 1) Date: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:30- 3:30 Presenters: Mrs. D. Munoz-Lopez, Ms. Alexia Mendoza, and Ms. Teresa Lee Strategies to support Ells (Session 2) Date: Monday, October 29, 2018…2:30-3:30 Presenters: Mrs. D. Munoz-Lopez, Ms. Alexia Mendoza, and Ms. Teresa Lee 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part C: Professional Development Digital Tools to Support Language Learners (Plickers) Date: Tuesday, November 6, 2018 1:00-2:30 Presenters: Ms. Munoz-Lopez, Ms. Alexia Mendoza, and Ms. Teresa Lee Working Together: Integrated Partnerships in the ENL Classroom (Session 1): Date: Monday, November 26, 2018 2:30-3:30 Presenters: Ms. Munoz-Lopez, Ms. Alexia Mendoza, and Ms. Teresa Lee Working Together: Integrated Partnerships in the ENL Classroom (Session 2): Date: Monday, December 17, 2018 2:30-3:30 Presenters: Ms. Munoz-Lopez, Ms. Alexia Mendoza, and Ms.Teresa Lee Strengthening Our Collaboration: A shared vision for co-teaching in the ENL classroom (Session 1) Date: Monday, January 14, 2019 2:30-3:30 Presenters: Ms. Munoz-Lopez, Ms. Alexia Mendoza, and Ms. Teresa Lee Strengthening Our Collaboration: A shared vision for co-teaching in the ENL classroom (Session 2) Date: Monday, January 28, 2019 2:30-3:30 Presenters: Ms. Munoz-Lopez, Ms. Alexia Mendoza, and Ms.Teresa Lee Getting Ready For the NYSESLAT : What to Expect Date: Monday, February 4, 2019 2:30-3:30 Presenters: Ms. Munoz-Lopez, Ms. Alexia Mendoza, and Ms.Teresa Lee Professional Development will be delivered at no cost to Title III money. All records, agendas and attendance sheets will be kept in a binder labeled:Professional Development in room 303, Ms. Lopez, ENL AP. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: To assist ENL/immigrant parents in becoming active participants in the education of their children, PS 66 will provide them with workshops. Workshops will take place in the Parent Coordinator's room . Date…November 27, 2018 Time…9:00-11:00 A.M. Provider…ENL Teachers Topic….Become Familiar with the New York School System Date…December 4, 2018 Time… 9:00-11:00 A.M. Providers…….ENL Teachers, Parent CoordinatorP Topic…Parent Resources: Ways to help your child at home. Date….January 15, 2019 Time… 9:00-11:00 A.M. Providers…..Ms. Elba Mojica Topic….Shop Smart/Save Money Date...February 12, 2019 Time…9:00-11-00 A.M. Providers…ENL Teachers Topic….Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT Date…March 12, 2019….Room - 213 Time…9:00-11:00 A.M. Providers…ENL Teachers, Parent Coordinator, and School Support Team Topic… Ways to help your child during State Tests Date…April 16, 2019 Time…9:00-11:00 A.M. Providers….Ms. Ana Freyta…Mrs. Myrna Brodwell Topic….Community Connections for Ell Families Date…May 21, 2019 Time...9:00-11:00 A.M. Providers…ENL Teachers and Ms. Yvette Lopez Topic…Celebration and Certificates The parent coordinator will contact parents by phone and flyers in their Home Language. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name School of Higher Expectations Borough Bronx School Number 066 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kevin Goodman Coach Michelle Dominguez ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Doris Munoz-Lopez Teacher/Subject Area Teresa Lee-ESL Teacher/Subject Area Alexia Mendoza-ESL Related-Service Provider Avril Morton-SETTS Superintendent Jaqueline Rosado Assistant Principal Yvette Lopez-Diaz, Madeline To Coach Amanda Johnson School Counselor Lisa Irvine Parent Tulsa Johnson Parent Coordinator Noemi Intriago Field Support Center Staff Member Janet Franco Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 3 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 594 Total number of ELLs 95 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.99% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Sp School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2018-2019 K 1 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? -To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs we use Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, Teachers College Concepts of Print for grades K-2, Baselines, Pre and Post assessments including on demand pieces for writing and Teacher-Created Assessments. The Fountas and Pinnell benchmark system is an individual assessment where the student reads a leveled text and answers comprehension questions. While the student is reading and answering questions a teacher is recording these answers. It tells us their reading and writing levels and their verbal communication. Through the use of this data our Expanding and Commanding students need help in developing writing skills while our Transitioning students need help in reading and writing skills. Entering and Emerging students need help to develop academic language. It helps us group 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  and differentiate our ELLs according to their reading and writing levels. When looking at our data we noticed the Entering and Emerging ELLs are moving quickly through the levels because they are learning the language and it is reflected in the improved reading and writing levels. We also noticed that once the ELL students reach a certain level their improvements slow down. This can be attributed to the complex text the students are reading. Teachers College Concepts of print is used to assess student phonological/phonemic awareness, phonics, and spelling. It is also used to determine a student's concepts of print, letter identification, and sight word recognition. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Groups focus on phonics, Fundations, letter recognition and sounds, sight words and other needs identified by their assessment results. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To evaluate the success of our program we look at several types of data. One area we examine are students' running records. We administer these running records every 6 weeks. We then monitor the students' progress and adjust our learning targets to address any area of concerns that arise. We also use the data from simulation assessments. We have two yearly simulations. Once the assessment is administered we look at the areas of both strengths and weaknesses. Having identified these areas we group the students according to their needs. We evaluate their success through their growth as students who were not proficient in English, but that increasingly were able to make the right adjustments in and out of the classroom in order to fit in a new system filled with challenges; the end result being rewarding. An assessment of each child's level of understanding, and sometimes misunderstandings of conventions helps teachers know what their students are attending to in print and what still needs to be learned. Teachers focus on literacy mini- lessons and other classroom literacy experiences that move children forward in their understanding of how concepts of print work. These important literacy understandings are developed through guided hands-on experience with reading and writing in the literacy workshop. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data from the F&P running records, TC concepts of print, baselines, pre/post assessments, and on demand pieces have been gathered, we meet with administration to determine: 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Using the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL tests the school uses the results to determine which students will be receiving tier 1, 2, and 3 services. We equate tier 1 as our Advanced students. Tier 1 is the core of instruction. This instruction is rigorous and evidence based. We equate tier 2 as our Intermediate students. Tier 2 students get a double dose of instruction. The RTI teacher gives extra attention, activities, and experience to these specific students. Finally, we equate tier 3 as our beginner group. Tier 3 is intensive intervention where the student gets individualized instruction by the RTI teacher. We continuously progress monitor these students to ensure they are getting the correct support. We also monitor the students' progress throughout these levels. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. -Based on our data patterns in the NYSESLAT (2017-2018), we have noticed that our upper grade students tend to need more support in the reading and writing areas of this test. In the lower grades, we noticed that the students need help in language development as well as writing. We noticed that new students to the country have limited vocabulary and basic reading/writing skills. We also noticed that on the NYSESLAT test, students scored at the entering level but progressed to the emergent/transitioning levels later in the year. Based on our data in the NYSESLAT test, we have also noticed that as students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  move from the early grades to the upper grades, their proficiency levels have improved in the speaking, listening, and reading area. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS 66 delivers ENL instruction in two models: Push in and Pull out. Push-in instruction is delivered through the co-teaching model, where At PS 66 instruction is delivered using The Pull-out Model , where students are placed in homogeneous groups. The ENL teachers and the classroom teachers work and plan together to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. At the entering, emerging, and transitional levels, integrated ENL with ELA is provided; at the expanding level, the integrated ENL is with any content area to help meet the needs of the students. Our Freestanding ENL Program is a rigorous, systematic program of English language instruction using second language acquisition methodologies such as: The Natural Approach, providing access to content area instruction through the use of various instructional supports, e.g., scaffolding (modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, graphic organizers, questioning, text re-presentation, Metacognition and working in cooperative groups) the Balanced Literacy model. The ENL program at PS 66 features high quality instructional practices that assist in the academic development and achievement of ELLs. Our classes have both an ENL instructional component that is based on the New York State ENL Standards and aligns to the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers provide instruction to engage ELL students in rigorous academic activities that promote conceptual and linguistic development in all disciplinary areas such as science, social studies, the arts, physical education and technology to achieve college and career readiness skills. b. TBE program. If applicable. At PS 66 our certified bilingual common branch teacher provides the ENL component in the program. We provide the students with a minimum of two content-area subjects in the home language . All the students share the same home language (Spanish). c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? P.S. 66 is in compliance with the mandated number of instructional minutes according to proficiency levels in each program. Mandated minutes of ENL as per CR-Part 154 are provided by a certified ENL teacher. The ENL teachers use our push-in models to provide meaningful instruction to our ELL population and follow a rigorous schedule on a daily basis. As per CR-Part 154, an entering student will receive 360minutes of ENL instruction which is broken into180 minutes of standalone and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction. In the Emerging level, students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction, 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes standalone for integrated ENL/ELA or any 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  other content area. Transitioning receives 180 minutes, 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA and 90 standalone or integrated ENL/ELA or any other content area. Expanding level 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or any other content area. Commanding level receives 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or any other content area. Once the proficiency levels are determined, the ENL teachers enters all student data into STARS. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our school, ENL teachers work with students in kindergarten through fifth grade who have been identified as English Language Learners (ELL). All of our students come from homes where a language other than English is spoken. Our students speak a variety of languages including Spanish, French, and Arabic. As ENL teachers, we support these students in reading, writing, listening, and speaking of English, as well as in their academic content. The ENL teacher works in the classrooms collaboratively with the classroom/content area teacher to provide language and content area instruction simultaneously. This model allows the ELLs to remain in the classroom and receive the support of both teachers. The ENL teacher also pulls ELLs from various classrooms to provide these students English language through content instruction. The students remain in the classroom for the majority of the day, but the classroom/content and ENL teachers are in constant communication in order to ensure curricular alignment. The ENL instruction is standard–based instruction that develops skills in listening with understanding, speaking, reading, and writing in English, as per the New York State ENL and ELA standards, and prepares the students to function successfully in the English language instructional program. The ENL component addresses both social English and the academic English that students need in order to succeed in the classroom. This model is designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, writing and communicating in English through the integration of academic content appropriate for the student's age, grade level, and English language skills. This instruction is provided in substantially equal daily allotments of instructional time. The content area instructional component of ENL provides grade-and age-level appropriate instruction in the required content area subjects in English supported by English as a second language methodologies, employed in a systematic and structured way, and is designed to develop cognitive skills of LEP/ELLs. We also use Reach Program from National Geographic. The ENL students receive support in their Native Language through various sources: use of dictionaries, IPADS, and tutoring. Google translate is conventionally used throughout the school. In our Kindergarten Bilingual Program students receive ENL services based on their proficiency levels. They received a minimum of 2 content-area in their home language, in our case is Spanish. Math, science, and social studies instruction is delivered in Spanish. For math they used the translated version in Spanish of GO Math: Vivan Las Matematicas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are evaluated in their native language using a series of assessments which include: The Spanish Lab, NYS assessments for all students, SIFE assessments, Teacher-Created Assessments, oral interviews. Students have access to multicultural libraries, math, and science books in their native language. Each classroom has access to computers in which students who need additional support may access. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status There are numerous ways we differentiate for our ELLs on a daily basis. We consider many factors when planning for ELLs. Some include but are not limited to their proficiency level, the amount of time they have been in the country, SIFE status, and their literacy level in their native language. We provide instruction based on assessed needs, then we offer after-school reading/math programs to improve literacy and math skills, by attending our ESL Title III after-school program and providing access to computer assisted language learning programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  5a. Once we determined that the student is SIFE we provide them with extra support in all content areas. The RTI teacher pulls them out one period a day and pushes in the classroom everyday she scaffolds academic language and vocabulary development. 5b-For the newcomers at P.S. 66 that have been in the U.S. school system for less than three years many things are being done to help them with the language transition. First, all newcomers are tested immediately upon registering and options are communicated to parents so that students can begin to receive needed language services as soon as possible. Instruction is differentiated for newcomers by building on vocabulary, developing listening comprehension skills, modeling reading and writing, using visuals, realia, and providing a buddy system. Next, teachers at P.S. 66 plan to push accordingly to student’s data in order to increase their reading levels which will then in turn increase their writing levels which will help them to perform well on the NYSESLAT expediting their transition to a monolingual classroom setting. To accomplish this, teachers communicate with their student where they are and where they need to be during reading and writing conferring. They scaffold academic language to support student participation during content area study. They use instructional in both languages and build on what the students already know in their native language. Assessments for the ELL students, such as the State Math, Science and Social Studies tests are offered in the students’ native language. Newcomers are also eligible to attend the AIS After School Program and Extended Day during which time they receive strategies for reading comprehension and fluency. Since NCLB now requires ELA testing for ELL’s after only one year, these newcomers are in great need of the things mentioned above. They also participate in iReady test preparation for the ELA and Math Test and our NYSESLT Academy’s “Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond”. 5c. For ELLs receiving services 4 to 6 years we use data to plan accordingly to the students' needs. The AIS teacher push in their classroom for reading, writing and math. Teachers collaborate together in planning differentiated instruction for the students. Students participate in the programs for Extended Day and are invited to the After school and Saturday programs. 5d. For the Long Term ELL’s, teachers focus on helping the students build foundations and schema they are lacking by explicit vocabulary instruction and one on one conferences. Students participate in test preparation for the NYSESLAT so they will be familiar with the test format and rubrics. Excellent teaching with the use of realia and explicit modeling are crucial for the long term ELL’s.The ELL students that are identified as having special needs are placed in Bilingual Special Education Classes. For those in general education classes, ENL and other services such as speech and SETTS are available to them. For these students, IEP’s are reviewed individually to determine the best instructional methods and to plan lessons accordingly. Students are Immersed in a print-filled environment and are provided context-enriching activities . They are engaged in small group activities and are provided multiple opportunities learn through modeling. Activities, assignments, and materials are modified based on level of proficiency. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers work with students individually and in small groups using a variety of researched based programs while incorporating ENL methodologies. Programs that are used could include Fundations, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention, Houghton Mifflin Leveled Readers, REACH by National Geographic,and computer programs. These students receive this additional instruction and support during the school day and during after school from their certified classroom teacher, ENL teacher, and AIS teacher. *5e. Our plan for former ELLs (in years 1 and 2 after testing proficient) provides those students with one weekly visit of ELL services in which the ENL teacher pushes into that student's class and provides support in either an individual basis or in a co-teaching style environment. In years one and two after testing English language proficient that student is still provided with time and a half for testing. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWD use a wide range of instructional strategies and materials to provide students with the best possible access to academic content areas; thus accelerating their language development. Most importantly, the IEP coordinator keeps in constant contact with the ESL department and coordinator, ensuring that the student's IEP is both update to date and being 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  met. Among the strategies used are: Scaffolded Instruction, Modeling, (Compare and Contrast, Retelling Facts, Making Inferences), Cooperative Learning, Accountable Talk, and Questioning to promote Higher Order Thinking (Blooms Taxonomy). Instructional strategies are diversified by grade as well as per level. Classroom communities are safe and comfortable as well as an environment where they can feel comfortable sharing ideas about the subject being taught. The materials that teachers use are: TC Reading and Writing, Go Math, Engage NY, Imagine Learning, F & P, Reach program), and Fundations for lower grades. We use the Related Services Report. This report tells us who the services providers are, frequency and duration. Based on the recommended services per IEP, we offer the Bilingual Program or a Comparable service plan based on the student academic plan. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 66 ensures that our ELL – SWD’s population receives multiple opportunities to succeed by offering these students the following: Push-in/ Pull-out AIS, After School, Reach, Imagine Learning, Fundations and Common Core Reading and Writing Clinics. Classroom instruction is based on data obtained from SESIS, NYS Tests as well as NYSESLAT scores and other formal/informal assessments to better and effectively deliver instruction to our ELL – SWD’s population within the least restrictive environment throughout the school year. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELL’s in ELA, Math, and other content areas are: AIS (Academic Intervention Services) with push-in models scheduled at different times during the school day. We used data from the ELA, Math, NYSITELL, and NYSESLAT tests to group our students. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels are placed in small groups no more than 8 students, transitioning and Expanding students are geoup accordingly to the years of service we also offer AIS services in After School in ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science on Wednesdays and Thursdays. As soon as the AIS After School Program is done, we also offer our students the opportunity to attend a program called the NYSESLAT Academy, which focuses on how to take and pass the NYSESLAT test. We use a phonics program called Fundations. We also use other programs such as Imagine Learning, which is a technology based program that gives our ELL students the extra support they need using technology. With the exception of Imagine Learning, which has a part of their program that can direct students in their native language if they are at the Beginning level in English, our programs offered are conducted in English and Spanish to those who need it. The targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other content areas are available to students during our after school program and Saturday Academy. These AIS groups offer a very low student-teacher ratio. Students are grouped based on their ELA level, their NYSESLAT proficiency level, their F &P reading level and several other risk factors. All ELLs who fall into one of the risk factor categories are invited to attend after meeting with their parents. This includes Entering and Emerging, ELLs with special needs, SIFE, and long-term ELLs. Programs include Wilson, Fundations, Targeted Guided Reading and REACH program. All intervention programs are taught in English with native language support. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming year, we are planning to integrate more technology through the use of smart boards, the Imagine Learning Program and the Fundations Program on all our Bilingual Education class. We will also be adopting TC Reading and Writing and Go Math programs and Engage NY with scaffolding to help support our ELLs. We adopted the TC Program in place of Ready Gen due to low reading and writing scores throughout the school. Engage NY will be used to supplement Math skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A The bilingual program will continue at PS 66. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Our ELL students have the same opportunities as the rest of our students to attend the different programs that we offer. Our process to invite students to our after school programs is to send letters home and have the students return their letters signed by their parents/guardians approving their placement into our programs. We offer an AIS After School Program geared to give support in different areas such as ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies. We also offer a program called the NYSESLAT Academy to provide support our ELL population in taking and passing the NYSESLAT test. We are using Title III and Title III Immigrant funding to supplement these services. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs such as after school programs, Saturday Academy, school assemblies and trips. Some of the activities at PS are the Harvest Dance and Luncheon, Pajama Day, Read-A-Thon Day, Crazy Hair Day, Field Day, Poem in Your Pocket Day, Moving Up Ceremonies, Music and Art exhibits. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In regards to technology, our students are immersed in technology through the use of Smartboards, laptops, and ipads are readily available to help support ELLs in engaging students and developing academic language . Visuals and oral language are a major basis of our instructional support for our ELLs allowing for a graphic aid. We all use Ready test prep materials throughout the school to prepare our students to take and pass the ELA, and Math tests. We also use a program called Fundations, which concentrates in teaching phonics, word help and letter sounds. We also use Imagine Learning, which is a technology based program geared towards providing support in reading, speaking, writing, and listening in English for our Beginners and Intermediate students. We also use “Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond” texts, which gives support in Speaking, Listening, Reading, and Writing as well. Students have access to multicultural libraries in their native language. In addition to technology, we use leveled books, picture dictionaries, maps, charts, graphic organizers, Big Books, picture cards, books on cd's and computer software to assist or ELLs in learning language and content. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language support is provided in Freestanding ESL model. The ESL Coordinator and an AIS teacher provide native language support in the classroom. Materials used are Go Math, multicultural Libraries and Science books in the student's native language. Support is also delivered through the use of bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, trade books in their native language, peer tutoring and support from bilingual staff. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The services that we provide are aligned with and support the students by being grade and age appropriate. The required services meet the student's academic as well as his or her language level based on what that student is being expected at that age/level/grade according to the NYS CCLS. The services correspond to the students age level primarily by supporting what that student is being taught and required to know, learn and understand as well as read, write, speak and listen. Our programs which are state and common core aligned also allow our ELL department to position all materials and lesson plans accordingly. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The only resources that are shared are the school auditorium, library, and science lab all of which follow a schedule. In regards to technology, Smartboards and laptops are readily available to help support ELLs. Visuals and oral language are a major basis of our instructional support for our ELLs allowing for a graphic aid. We all use Ready test prep materials throughout the school to prepare our students to take and pass the ELA, and Math tests. We also use a program called Fundations, which concentrates on teaching phonics, word help, and letter sounds, in addition to, Imagine Learning, MyOn, and iReady, which is a technology based program geared towards providing support in reading, speaking, writing, listening, and Math in English for our Beginners and Intermediate students. We also use “Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond” texts, which gives support in Speaking, Listening, Reading, and Writing as well. Students have access to multicultural libraries in their native language. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). *Throughout the school year, the ENL department meets with students to provide information on after school programs, Saturday Academy, RTI, and Emotional support services offered by Social Workers and Guidance Counselors. For the new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year we offer, reading buddies, Fundations as well as our high effective push-in and pull-out. We also offer NYSESLAT practice and NYSESLAT RTI services. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our school is very culturally diverse and because of this, we must be sure to address specific knowledge and attitudes that are relevant to teaching English Language Learners. Our professional development sessions(also called Teacher Academies), often focus on the basic constructs of bilingualism and second language development, the nature of language proficiency and the role of the first language and culture in learning. These items may be the main focus or sub-focus during professional development sessions(it varies). Teachers and support staff are given opportunities to discuss the demands that mainstream education places on culturally diverse students as well. P.S. 66 Calendar of Professional Development (1 hour sessions). During grade common planning, the ENL staff provides effective content area based strategies to support ENL instruction. Workshops include but are not limited to academic language and tier ll and tier lll vocabulary development. At PS 66, professional development is provided not only to teachers, but to support staff such as paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, and school administrators where they can learn different strategies that can help students with academic, personal, and social concerns. Teachers will receive in house and outside Professional Development in all content areas with focus on writing, reading, math, science, and social studies. Our Professional Development will also focus on the social and emotional well being of our ENL students. These workshops will include our paraprofessionals, teachers, secretaries, counselors, social workers, content teachers, RTI, and School's Administrators. We constantly provide opportunities for our staff to attend different workshops, and professional development sessions across the grade as well as outside seminars, which eventually can make the transition for our ELL population a smooth one. Such workshops/seminars include: Planning Instruction aligned to NYSESLAT Targets of Measurement, Planning Professional Development for All Teachers Responsive to the Needs of ELLs, Writing across all subjects for Newcomers, Entering, and Emerging ELLs- K-5, and Understanding CR-Part 154, What Constitutes an Effective ENL Program, and Nuts and Bolts for New Teachers of Students who are Learning English as a New Language or in Bilingual Classroom, and Meeting the Language Development and Content Needs of ELLs, monthly ENL Liaison meetings, RBERN workshops, Showcase School workshop that both Bilingual and ENL teacher attended, LAC workshops. These professional development sessions help teachers enhance the delivery of their instruction by integrating the ENL Common Core Learning Standards with a strong focus on the development 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  of academic language. These activities will support teachers in delivering Common-Core-aligned instruction:teachers will apply the Language Experience Approach to whole group, small group and individuals as an entry point, develop effective systems for planning, supporting their ELLs, and collaborating with their colleagues. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At P.S. 66 we provide our ELL students with information about the different middle schools and the programs they have to offered. In addition the bilingual school psychologist meets with the students as needed to support with the transition to middle school. Our ELL teachers provide support in the Middle School selection process by explaining the importance to assist to these Middle School fairs. Our guidance counselor is actively involved in the selection process and reaches out to parents/guardians in their native language. The guidance counselor meets with the 5th grade teachers during their common planning and walks them though the articulation process for the middle school application. She also calls the parents and set up appointments to go over the application and the process providing translation as needed. We provide workshops for the teachers on how to communicate effectively with parents regarding the articulation process. The school psychologist along with the ENL teachers give them strategies to support the transition from elementary to Middle School. The minimum 7.5 hours of Ell training for all staff is offered during various Teacher Academies. These professional development sessions are offered on various Mondays throughout the school year. Further ELL professional development sessions may also be conducted for all staff during the school day (1 hour in length). All agendas and attendance sheets are maintained by the Literacy Coach and are easily available. September 2018- NYS CR-Part 154 Requirements and Implementation and NYS Blueprint for ELL Success October 2018 -Opening New Doors for Ell's (2 sessions 30 minutes each) November 2018-Strategies to support Ell's (2 sessions 30 minutes each) December 2018 - Digital tools to support language learners (Plickers) January 2019- Working together- Integrated Partnerships in the ENL Classroom (2 sessions 30 minutes each) February 2019- Strengthening our collaboration: A Shared Vision for Co-Teaching in the ENL Classroom March 2019 - Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT- understanding the Targets of Measurements April 2019 - Understanding the Targets of Measurements May 2019- Celebration of Cultures in the Classroom June 2019-Preventing the Great Summer Slide-Creating Fun and Easy Learning Kits! **All professional development sessions are 1 hour in length, unless otherwise noted Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL department individually meets with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year. This meeting is in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings. The students’ goals, their language development progress, their English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas are discussed. This meeting also includes any school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English. In addition, the meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands and attendance is recorded. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  -Our Parent Coordinator assists our ELL parents to sign up to free ESL classes, as well as GED and writing courses offered at various locations throughout New York City. Our Parent Coordinator also conducts different workshops through out the year geared to help parents support their children in different academic areas at home. Our Family worker in conjunction with our one of Social Workers offer two workshops per month on topics such as on attendance and how important is for their children to attend school on a daily basis, how to support their students in literacy, math, and other content areas. They also conduct workshops on the importance of immunizations, and any other health related issues. Arts and crafts workshops are also provided to our parents throughout the school year. Some of the activities parents partake at PS 66 are: Monthly parent luncheons in honor of different cultures, A Night at the Museum in May, Father-Daughter dance, Holiday assemblies,Mother's Day Celebration, and Father's Day BBQ, Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kevin Goodman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS66 School DBN: 12x066 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mr. Goodman Title Principal Ms. Yvette Lopez Assistant Principal Ms. N. Intriago Parent Coordinator Ms. C. Lora ENL/Bilingual Teacher Tulsa Johnson Parent Doris Munoz-Lopez/ ENL Teacher/Subject Area Teresa Lee/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Dominguez Ms. Amanda Johnson Coach Coach Ms. A. Freyta School Counselor Ms. Jacqueline Rosado Janet Franco Ms. Morton Karyna Tejeda N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist Other IEP Teacher Other Education Administrator Field Support Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 10/17/18 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X066 School Name: School of Higher Expectations Superintendent: Jacqueline Rosa The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Doris Munoz-Lopez ENL Teacher/Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. According to the most recent Profile Data, 213 students at PS 66 come from homes that speak a language other than English. This information is based on the school's demographic data. We have the Department of Education Language Identification Cards available so the parents/guardians can identify their home language. At the beginning of the school year (on going throughout the year) the Parent Coordinator, Ms. N. Intriago sends home a survey to determine their language preference. The Parent Coordinator also informs the school community about available services via e-mails, posters, PSA meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2 608 7 1 1 184 0 3 2 5 Arabic English French Fulani Seri Spanish Haitian Creole Slovak Urdu Wolof 0.25 74.78 0.86 0.12 0.12 22.63 0 0.37 0.25 0.62 2 608 6 1 1 184 1 3 2 5 0.25 74.78 0.74 0.12 0.12 22.63 0.12 0.37 0.25 0.62 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. *Welcome back Newsletter September 9-11 2018/19 (the first week of school). The school has a list of personnel available to translate in Spanish. All documents are translated by 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  the first week of school and during registration throughout the year. bilingual, ENL Staff, parent coordinator, or LAC. *PS 66 School Policies and Uniforms distributed distributed the first week of the month. *Monthly School Calendars occurred on September 13, 2018. *Welcome back Orientation/Open House/Meet the teachers night *Parent-Teacher Conferences occurs in November 2018, March 2019, and May 2019. *After-School and Saturday Program notifications sent during the month of October 2018 The school has a list of personnel available to translate in Spanish. All documents are translated by bilingual, ENL Staff, parent coordinator, or LAC. *New York State testing dates *Monthly Newsletters by Grades letters sent to parents on March 2019. distributed on the first week of the month The school has a list of personnel available to translate in Spanish. All documents are translated by bilingual, ENL Staff, parent coordinator, or LAC. *Promotional Criteria Letters distributed in June 2019 The school has a list of personnel available to translate in Spanish. All documents are translated by bilingual, ENL Staff, parent coordinator, or LAC.. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Orientation September 13th November Parent-Teacher conferences March May Curriculum night May/June ENL Parent Orientations Ongoing interpretation service(s)? Parents were notified through school calendars, newsletters, posters and phone calls. Notices are sent both in English and Spanish. For informal meetings where we need to call home, the identified staff to translate is available to help disseminate the information. Parents are notified through letters, school calendar, monthly newsletters, parent engagement meetings, and school posters. Notices are sent both in English and Spanish. For informal meetings where we need to call home, the identified staff to translate is available to help disseminate the information. Staff is available on every floor throughout the building for translations. Parents are notified through letters, school calendar, monthly newsletters, parent engagement meetings, and school posters. Notices are sent both in English and Spanish. For informal meetings where we need to call home, the identified staff to translate is available to help disseminate the information. Staff is available on every floor throughout the building for translations. LAC and ENL staff will provide interpretation services when needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school will contact the LAC or bilingual school based staff as well as the over-the-phone interpretation unit to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff is provided information in writing and through Professional Development where they will receive guidance on language assistance services available for the school. Staff will be provided with information on translation services including ways to utilize over-the-phone interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents/Guardians will receive monthly letters both in English and Home Language explaining all the interpretation services available at PS 66. The Parent Coordinator, Mrs. N. Intriago along with the Language Access Coordinator will conduct monthly meetings explaining the interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At PS 66 we gather feedback from parents and guardians through parent surveys created by the SLT and Parent Coordinator. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74 
