2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X067 School Name: P.S. 067 MOHEGAN SCHOOL Principal: JEFFREY SANTIAGO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Mohegan School CS 67X 12X067 321200010067 Pre-K-5 School Number (DBN): 2024 Mohegan Avenue, Bronx, NY 10460 718-823-4101 718-823-4105 Phone Number: Jeffrey Santiago Fax: JSantia7@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Jeffrey Santiago Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Mr. Nicholas Moses Ashley Rodriguez Mr. Nicholas Moses SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Christina Martinez n/a n/a Joseph Vereen Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Rd. 10460 jrosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-328-2310 Phone Number: 718-542-7736 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx NY 10458 nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-826-7778 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jeffrey Santiago Mr. Nicholas Moses Ashley Rodriguez Abigail Torres N/A N/A Joseph Vereen Juan Martinez Samantha Macdonald *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/ UFT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jaclyn Broccoli Maria Pacelko Joanna Gonzalez SholaOmotato Carmen Rodriguez Cristina Martinez Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Mohegan school’s mission is to develop young men and women to become independent and life-long learners. Through inquiry work and collaboration, we hope to build creative and curious minds, a sense of compassion for others and the courage to act on their beliefs. Ultimately, it is our goal to ensure all scholars take ownership of their academic and personal goals. The Mohegan School C.S. 67x seeks to create a challenging learning environment that encourages high expectations for success through developmentally-appropriate instruction that allows for individual differences and learning styles. Our school promotes a safe, orderly, caring, and supportive environment. Each student’s self-esteem is fostered by positive relationships with students and staff. We strive to have our parents, teachers, and community members actively involved on our scholars’ learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. There is a wide range of strategic collaborations and partnerships including: ● Phipps Program to reinforce character building. ● Bronx Borough Field Support Center ● Cambridge for teacher support The staff will continue to work together and we have embraced the Common Core Learning Standards and Instructional Shifts. We have adopted CCLS aligned curricular programs which support our Curriculum Maps, Units of Study, Performance Tasks and an extensive range of after school programs to meet the needs of all students. We use teacher's college units for both reading and writing. Teachers supplement Go Math with EngageNY and teacher created notebooks. The leadership team’s high expectations are well- communicated to staff and students through both written and verbal feedback. The school is currently a focus school with over 90% of the students who are free and reduced lunch. We are working on creating a partnership with Montefiore Hospital. This partnership will provide an in-house clinic at our school which will service the entire community. Some of the services that will be provided to students and their families include but are not limited to dental, vision, and basic care. Parents are encouraged to actively participate in the life of the school. They serve on the School Leadership Team, Parent's Association, and Title I Parent Committee, as trained volunteers and are welcomed as valued members of our school community. Parents attend student celebrations, visit as surprise readers and accompany classes on trips. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Mohegan School is an elementary school with 515 students from pre-kindergarten through grade 5. The school serves a population comprised of 25% Black, 74% Hispanic, and 1% Asian students. The student body includes 12% English language learners and 21% special education students. Boys account for 55% of the students enrolled and girls account for 45%. The average student attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 is 89.3%. Mr. Jeffrey Santiago will be starting his eighth year as the principal of C.S. 67x. Our students have a variety of learning disabilities, including but not limited to some with ADD and ADHD. Some of our students receive speech, PT, and OT. We use Leveled Literacy Intervention and Fundations, to help students build on their reading & phonemic strategies for our struggling readers. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The administration and faculty reflect and refine curricula to ensure high order thinking and integrate non-fiction and fiction into all core subjects. Teacher teams use data from student work products, meet with administrators for "data talks" and use assessments to determine how to revise and modify the curriculum, so all students improve academically. According to the Framework for Great Schools, C.S. 67x is improving on incorporating rigor into our instruction. Leaders communicate high expectations through feedback using the Danielson Framework. Leaders provide specific feedback and create and communicate individual action plans for teachers, which are reflected in the improvement of student work products and benchmark assessments. However, the school faces a number of challenges including: ● improving the academic achievement English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities in both math and ELA. ● Using a school wide data tracker in order to access student data in all areas. ● building on the positive social and emotional well-being of our students. The school has identified the following key areas of focus for 2018-2019: ● improving the academic achievement students in specific sub-groups such as ELL's and SWD's on the State ELA and math tests. ● increasing positive social interactions as measured by a decrease in Online Occurrence Reports. ● Use a school-wide data system to collect and analyze student data. ● developing a cadre of grade and subject teacher leaders who take an active role in instructional leadership. ● increasing parent involvement in a wide range of events including parent and community workshops, school-wide programs, and Parent Association meetings. The school has made great progress in the following areas based off of the Framework for Great Schools: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  *Based on the Framework for Great Schools, we have made the most progress in building trust among staff and students. *We have also shown great improvements in student achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X067 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 533 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 57 51 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 40 35 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 89.1% % Reduced Lunch 10.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 73.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.1 0% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 40.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 72% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YES N/A NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A NO YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 54 50 88.1% 0.2% 20.8% 25.0% 0.2% 1.3% 6 2% 6.3 38.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 state ELA and math assessments, CS 67 has identified the following performance trends Percent of Students Scoring at Levels 1-4 ELA State Assessment 2017-2018 Percent of All Students Scoring Levels 1-4 (grades 3-5) State201District CS 67 CS 67 Level 8 2018 2017 2018 1 24% 42% 38% 29% 2 31% 34% 30% 31% 3 29% 18% 26% 31% 4 16% 6% 6% 9% 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Percent of Students Scoring at Levels 1-4 Math State Assessment 2017-2018 Percent of All Students Scoring Levels 1-4 (grades 3-5) State201District CS 67 CS 67 Level 8 2018 2017 2018 1 30% 57% 41% 35% 2 25% 25% 31% 27% 3 24% 12% 18% 20% 4 21% 6% 10% 18% According to the 2016-2017 Quality Review findings: *The implementation of Positive Behavioral Intervention and Support (PBIS) program, character education classes, student government and student celebrations fosters the school's approach to building a safe and inclusive classroom. *The use of questioning and discussion techniques, as well as scaffolds provide multiple entry points into the curriculum *Common assessments are used to adjust curricula and instruction. Teachers' assessments provide actionable feedback to students. After a comprehensive view of CS67x academic program, we identified the following strengths:  A safe and inclusive school culture focused on social and emotional learning fosters and values student voice and supports students' learning needs through the implementation of PBIS and character education. Student discussions reflect high levels of student thinking and participation.   Curriculum is continually reflected upon and refined to meet the needs of CS 67's students. These modifications are made based on student work and data.  Teachers and administration are engaged in structured inquiry-based professional collaborations in order to make key decisions to the curriculum and instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  After a comprehensive view of CS 67x academic program, we identified the following weaknesses:  Scaffolds are continuously provided for students, but extensions (early finishers) are not always included into the curriculum.  The line of questioning is mostly from teacher to student rather student to student.  During discussions and throughout the lesson, scholars should show more ownership of their learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades 3 to 5 will demonstrate growth according to state standards in English Language Arts as measured by a 5% increase in the percentage of students who moved from a level 2 to 3 or 3 to 4 on the state exam through implementing a variety of reading strategies such as close reading, and road mapping. Also, by June 2019, 60% of students in kindergarten through second grade will show growth by at least two reading levels based on the Fountas and Pinnell assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will continue our third year of our school-wide inquiry team that will work together on the needs of CS 67x and communicate the goals and strategies to all teacher teams. Based on the 2017-2018 F & P levels and New York State Exams, teachers will target small groups of students. Instruction will be based on reinforcing comprehension skills and close reading strategies through the use of Spotlight, Leveled Literacy Intervention, Fundations and guided reading leveled passages. For Math, we will use differentiated worksheets from our teacher created notebooks and lessons from Go Math and EngageNY. Classroom teachers will continue to use I-Ready, which is an online program that personalizes reading for students. Through I-Ready, students will practice reading comprehension and fluency skills. I-Ready will provide diagnostics to drive differentiated instruction based on Common Core Learning Standards. We will use the I-Ready diagnostic results to tailor lesson plans and differentiate instruction for groups and individual scholars. Teachers will create a rotation schedule so all students are actively using I-Ready. Through observations, admin will track the rotation of I-Ready. We will continue to reflect and revise our teacher's college reading and writing units based on student data. We will also be using Leveled Literacy Intervention. Administration and teachers will include multiple close reading strategies, reciprocal reading, shared reading and guided reading practices in the current units of study. Units will be common core aligned, incorporate instructional shifts and C.S. 67's instructional focus. We will continue to offer an after-school literacy and math program that will focus on promoting academic growth and continued rigorous instruction for grades 3-5. During this time, teachers will administer a baseline and benchmark assessments to strategically group and track student progress. Students will also have access to I-ready to ensure skill-based individual instruction. We will also offer October 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals ENL students Classroom Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principals Inquiry team members Classroom teachers and coaches. Principal Assistant Principals Coaches and Classroom teacher Principal Assistant Principals Classroom Teachers Consultants and coaches Bottom 3rd students, SWD’s September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 ENL’s and students who scored below their grade level on the F & P. All Students All Students Looking at ENL’s, SWD’s, Temporary Housing, and High Achievers Students in grades 3-5.  a Saturday Academy which will provide targeted instruction for scholars in grades 3-5. SWD's During curriculum nights, the parent coordinator along with administration and teachers will present reading activities and online instructional resources such as MYON that parents can work on with their children at home. Students will receive, "Getting Ready" books over the Summer to help prepare them for the next grade. We will continue to provide students with "book baggies" that include their "just right books" that will be taken home each night to increase independent reading. The work of the teacher mentors will continue to help our first and second year teachers strengthen their instruction and support best practices. Therefore, best practices and effective instructional practices will help student achievement. There will be a New Teacher Institute during the first week of school for first year teachers to attend a professional learning series. Students Parents September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Parent coordinator New Teachers September 2018-June 2019 NTC Mentor Assistant Principal Teachers will continue to visit their colleagues classrooms to observe best practices. Through inter-visitations, colleagues will build on collaboration and the sharing of teaching practices. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals Through our partnership with Omni-learn, teachers are also receiving professional learning on how to engage students in STEM projects and hands-on learning. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The role of the parent coordinator will be to communicate with parents via newsletters, and in-person each day during arrival and dismissal. The parent coordinator will hold workshops to help parents understand rigorous instruction and the common core learning standards. The PC will work with parents to understand ways they can support their children at home through reading together and the use of I-Ready. Family Curriculum Night-will be held in September and the administration will be responsible for the oversight. Parent Workshops-the parent coordinator will hold monthly workshops for parents and the administration will be responsible for the oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Class DOJO-Teachers will use Class DOJO regularly to communicate with parents and administration will be responsible for the oversight. Monthly Parent Newsletters-At the beginning of each month teachers will work collaboratively to create a monthly newsletter for parents to remind them of upcoming events and to communicate what their child is learning each week. Monthly Calendar-Administration creates a monthly calendar that goes home to parents that outlines what students are learning each month in each subject area. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. I-Ready, along with Ready books, and Coach workbooks will be used to promote critical thinking skills and engaging discussions during the after-school program. Both programs are Common Core aligned and provide rigorous instruction. I-Ready provides access to leveled texts and individual instruction. I-Ready includes adaptive diagnostics that help to show gaps and provides next steps for instruction. I-Ready can also be used to form small groups and target instruction and differentiated next steps. *Leveled guided reading passages and Fundations will be used during Saturday Academy. Teachers will also use EngageNY.org to provide grade leveled texts. *All teachers will receive Teacher's College reading and writing kits that will expose scholars to various reading strategies and help build their stamina in both reading and writing. *Access to myON will be provided to all students. myON is an online reading program with over 4,000 books. Students take an assessment when they first sign on and are then assigned texts at their level. The books help build students’ reading levels. Based on comprehension questions at the end of each book, students will either move up a level or stay on the same level. We hold after-school programs three days a week beginning on October 24th which will include three teachers (one per grades 3, 4, and 5). There is one supervisor in charge of the program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  In October 2018, a CCLS aligned simulation in ELA will be administered to grades 3-5. A second simulation will be administered in the beginning of February with the expectation of at least a 5% increase of level 1's that showed progress to a level 2 and 7% of level 2's that showed progress to a level 3 from the first simulation to the second simulation. This will show us student growth in order to achieve our goal by June 2019. Grades k-2 will administer their first F & P from September to October 2018. The second diagnostic will be administered by December 2018. 10% of scholars will show at least one level of growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will be utilizing Ready simulations and Fountas and Pinnell. During our February benchmark review, we found that: *51.7% of kindergarten students demonstrated growth in their F & P levels. *1st Grade-91% of students demonstrated growth. 2% moved up 1 level, 29% moved up 2 levels and 60% of 1st graders moved up 3 or more levels. *2nd Grade-85% of 2nd graders demonstrated growth. 34% of students demonstrated growth of at least 1 level, 36% moved up 2 levels, and 13% moved up three or more levels. *3rd Grade-93% of 3rd graders demonstrated growth. 53% demonstrated growth of 1 level and 40% showed growth in 2 or more levels. 4th Grade-66% of students demonstrated growth. 64% demonstrated growth of 1 level and 2% showed growth in 2 or more levels. 5th Grade-88% of students demonstrated growth. 77% showed growth of 1 level and 11% showed growth in 2 or more levels. For Grades 3-5, we used the READY Simulation as a benchmark. We have identified the following: 3rd Grade- 12% growth. 4th Grade- 23% growth. 5th Grade-8% growth. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X - X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After a comprehensive view of CS 67x's academic program, we identified the following strengths and the school report card data:  School leaders and the staff communicate expectations through parent workshops based on academic supports, anti-bullying prevention and social-emotional supports.  The integration of project-based learning opportunities and writing celebrations create authentic experiences for students.  The instructional focus of student discussions and rigorous questions helps establish a supportive environment where students are able to engage in discussion, explain their thinking, and respond to their classmates thoughts and ideas. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  After a comprehensive view of CS 67x’s academic program, and the school report card data, we identified the following weaknesses:  Create more project based opportunities for scholars.  Allow scholars to form inquiries and opportunities for them to initiate their own research  Continue to build on strong family and community ties.  Continue to provide a strong supportive environment for all staff and students at C.S. 67x. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will demonstrate an increase in positive social interactions as measured by a 4% decrease in Online Occurrence Reports of level 1 to level 5 incidents occurring in the classrooms. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) CS 67x will continue to implement School-Wide Positive Behavior interventions and support. Teachers and Staff September 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals CS 67x will continue to implement a series of Bully Prevention activities through class presentations, including student-led presentations, assembly programs, and parent workshops using the PBIS bullying prevention curriculum. The entire school community A series of Character Education lessons in classrooms will continue throughout all grades by the school's social worker and dean. Students and Parents Dean Social Worker Classroom teachers Character Education lessons will be translated for ENL’s. PHIPPS Boys and Girls Club will reinforce character building during the extended day. Teachers will collaborate to set clear expectations and a reward system within their classrooms and throughout the grade. These plans will be aligned to the school wide PBIS interventions. Teachers will turn-key strategies that they learned from 4R's PD series. All teachers will practice for 4R's and restorative circles in their classroom each day to build on the social and emotional well being of their students. Professional Learning Sessions will address PBIS and classroom management strategies. The dean and the school social worker will continue to inform the staff on “Respect for All” learning activities. Teachers Staff Members September 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Social worker Dean Classroom teachers Teacher Mentor 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  P.S. 67x will continue providing professional development for all teacher teams on the Respect for All curriculum, and PBIS intervention strategies. Mentors will support new teachers in using a social-emotional learning framework to create a positive, productive, and equitable classroom environment of safety, respect, and rapport. The social worker along with the dean will hold a character education and "Respect for All" class for students to attend with their parents. PBIS student reward system will be implemented with fidelity for ALL students and also targets subgroups. Mohegan bucks will be used for students to attain rewards based on them following the established school-wide rituals, routines and rules as outlined in PBIS. The school social worker will continue working with students one-on-one and in small groups who are experiencing behavioral difficulties including students in various subgroups. The social worker will provide professional development for teachers on how to address the needs of students with disabilities, English as a New Language and other high-need student subgroups. Teachers Teachers will use Class DOJO (a behavior system) which allows teachers to communicate with parents on a daily basis. Class DOJO monitors scholar behavior through a point system. All scholars have their own avatar and profile. Scholars and Parents SEA (educational arts program) will be working with our students on building their creativity and expressing themselves through the arts. Students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 November 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27 All staff members Students Students September 2018-June 2019 All School Staff September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals Implementers: Classroom Teachers Deans Social Worker Parent Coordinator Social Workers Teachers Teachers  We have provided each student with a book bag which contains summer reading material as well as getting ready for the next grade books. These books will help students prepare for the next year. The books helps students and parents read to each other by having one side of the book tailored to parents and one tailored to the students. We celebrate student writing after each unit of study. Parents are invited to the classroom to listen to their children share their published writing pieces during our end of unit writing celebrations. The parent coordinator will organize assemblies and parent information meetings. The PC will also send out monthly newsletters. The assistant principals will be the key personnel and responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Crisis intervention team and social worker will continue to conduct inter-class presentations, assembly programs, student focus groups, parent outreach, and provide professional development to staff. The Parent Coordinator will conduct parent workshops. Administration and staff will continue to hold Movie Nights, Parent Paint Night, Writing Celebrations and Awards Night and other activities to promote positive behavior and promote family engagement. Teachers will be provided with the PBIS Framework to teach pro-social behaviors and promote social emotional growth. Parent Coordinator monies will be used to host workshops on a monthly basis. Administration and teachers volunteer to stay for our movie/family nights which are held on a monthly basis. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will be conducted through an analysis of the OORs reports. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  In November, January and March, we will analyze the OORS reports and make any adjustments to the classroom and school-wide behavior plans as needed. We will also observe the 4R's implementation. In November, we hope to see at least a 2% decrease and another 1% decrease in January. By March 2019, we will reach our goal of a 4% decrease. In our progress monitoring review, we analyzed the OORS reports and identified that the OORS incidents from level 1-5 have decreased by 31% as of January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will be conducting an analysis of the OORS reports during the 2018-2019 school year to view trends and patterns. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X - X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our last Quality Review Report in 2016-2017, we obtained a rating of Proficient on 4.2 based on: ● Teachers being engaged in structured inquiry-based professional collaborations. ● Grade level leaders exemplify distributed leadership structures and have a voice in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. ● Data talks and the student work protocol are used to identify next steps for small group instruction and re-teach lessons. The following areas were identified as an area for improvement: ● To continue to provide differentiated professional learning opportunities (based on advance data and teacher surveys) for new teachers to develop and refine their practice and provide an avenue for new teachers to collaborate with colleagues on best practices. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  The Elementary School Quality Snapshot for CS 067x Mohegan School rates: How well the teachers work with each other as good. How clearly are high expectations communicated to students and staff as good. According to our NYSED School Report Card, our SWD's and ELL population are our subgroups that need improvement in ELA strategies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will continue to teach writing through the teacher's college model and 4-point rubric. Fifty percent of students will show growth on the Ready Simulation Extended Response from the first simulation to the second simulation administered based on the 4-point rubric. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will participate in in-house and on-going professional learning sessions based on Teacher's College writing and reading strategies. Cambridge will work with groups of teachers on how to effectively implement Teacher's college reading and writing units. We will specifically focus on how to differentiate within these lessons for our Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. All classroom teachers September 2018-June 2019 School Administrators, Teacher Mentors, Coaches and consultants Teachers will use the Ready Simulations to assess and analyze extended and short responses. Teacher Teams November 2018-June 2019 School Administrators Teachers and consultants Mentors and the Assistant Principal's will work with new teachers and give additional professional development on the writing units. They will work on using the Student Work Protocol and analyzing the end of unit writing pieces to identify grade, class and individual student trends. New Teachers September 2018-June 2019 New Teacher Center Mentor Instructional Coaches Since our subgroups of SWD's and ELL's need extra support, we will have our subgroups practice road mapping and provide graphic organizers to the TC writing. We will also use parts of the rubric in order for students to master a couple strategies at a time. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals Assistant Principals Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have a monthly calendar that provides parents with units at a glance of what their children are doing in school. We have parent curriculum nights in which teachers help parents learn the skills and strategies that their children are currently learning. We have Tuesday time where parents can meet with the teacher after school to discuss immediate feedback. We also have monthly parent newsletters per grade that keeps them informed of what is happening in our school. The Assistant Principal will be the key personnel responsible for the oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Inquiry team  Teacher's College resources  Cambridge consultants   The administration team and coaches will continue to use google docs to track teacher support.  There will be an after-school program where students will continue working on reading and writing as well as math. The program will be three times a week beginning on October 24th, 2018. Students from grade 3-5 will attend and there will be three teachers and one supervisor working the program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. After each unit, teachers will monitor student growth by analyzing student writing on the extended response (use of 4-point rubric) and student work protocol. In February 2018, we will conduct a Student Work Protocol and analyze student growth in writing based on the 4-point rubric in order to assess our progress towards our goal. We would like to see growth for for 20% of students based on the writing rubric. During our comparative review of the extended response simulation #1 and #2, we have not yet met our goal. We will be implementing an "Extended Response Bootcamp" to target small group instruction for writing responses. We will also create a 4-point student friendly checklist for students to monitor their own writing. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the first (in October) and second (in February) Ready Simulation that is administered and specifically look at the extended response. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X - X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The most recent Quality Review identified the following strengths: ● school leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the school community, providing training and a system of accountability to ensure those expectations are met. ● school leaders and faculty ensure that assessments are aligned to curricula and that student outcomes are continuously analyzed to assess team and class practices and strategies. ● professional development and team collaborations promote opportunities for leadership development, and reflective practices to enable teachers to continuously review and revise teaching strategies and practices to increase student achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, new teachers will show at least a 25% growth on domain 3 on the Danielson Rubric. Teachers who have two or more years of experience will show at least a 10% growth on domain 3. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will continue to participate in peer observations and walk-throughs to document strategies learned during professional development sessions led by their colleagues through reflections sheets and an inter-visitation tool kit. Teachers A Vertical Team of teachers will be formed to reflect and refine the professional learning sessions. This group of teachers will play a key role in the professional development of teachers and key decisions of what teachers need to help their students achieve. Teachers Grade level teachers We will continue to provide group and individual professional development for all teachers to help them develop leadership skills and build their knowledge. Teachers will continue to have opportunities to reflect on professional development sessions and work individually or with colleagues to lead professional development sessions. We will also be providing a New Teacher Summer Institute to begin professional development for all new teachers before the school year begins. We will be implementing Fundations this year to help our struggling learners and subgroups such as our Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. We will also continue using the Leveled Literacy Intervention Program to build students' comprehension and fluency skills. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) October 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administrators Coaches Administrators Teachers Administrators and coaches All teachers July 2018-June 2019 Administration and coaches Administration Teachers will be provided with professional development on how to differentiate questions and provide engaging activities for SWD's and ENL's. We will review QTEL (Quality Teaching for English Learners) with all staff members. Specifically, we will review mind-mirrors, anticipatory guides and four voices. All teachers Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-2019 Administration and coaches How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  We have a school leadership team which encumbrances both parents and staff members. Together, we make key decisions that affect the student body and school. As a school we have grade leaders that share in the decision making and set forth the norms that each grade must follow. Our PA president and UFT chapter leader play vital roles along with the school administration in demonstrating a sense of unity and partnership with parents to move the school forward. The Parent Coordinator will provide monthly calendars to inform parents of at home of the writing strategies and journal writing they can practice with their child. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PD support and coaching from: ● Cambridge ● New Teacher Center ● Leadership books and articles for staff discussion Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration will create a PD calendar based on the 2017-2018 advance data. As a result, the sharing of best practices will lead to student achievement. We will measure student growth (at least 7%) according to the READY Simulations. The PD plan has been refined based on teachers' input and teachers' needs based on the advance data by June 2019, teachers will have shown an increase in domain 3b. The PD plan will also reflect differentiation for new teachers. In February 2018, the administration team will analyze the data from domain 3b of all returning and new teachers in the building. Based on the analysis, we will adjust our strategies and modeling techniques to support teachers in domain 3. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will be conducting Ready simulations that will measure student progress. This simulation will take place two times throughout the year. The results will be utilized to help support instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  After reviewing the Advance observation reports, we have found that teachers still need support with domain 3b. We will adjust our plan to include differentiated PD's on questioning and discussion as well as 3c and 3d. We will also continue to model how to ask effective questions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After a comprehensive review of C.S.67’s strong family and community ties, we found the following strengths:  High expectations are communicated to parents through newsletters, monthly calendar, progress reports and report cards.  Parent workshops are provided to support their children at home in Common Core mathematics, reading and  anti-bullying. Workshops also explain the expectations for each grade level. Staff communicates high expectations through Tuesday’s parent engagement time where parents meet with teachers to discuss student progress, review student work, and obtain resources to support students at home. The school recognizes the importance of partnerships with parents as a cornerstone towards growth. C.S. 67 has identified the following areas in which we will continue to work on: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39   Although access to parents is in place, we still need to work on increasing the percentage of parents who are involved in school activities such as writing celebrations, surprise readers and events such as the Science Fair. *. The school will work towards increasing the response rates by involving parents in more school events such as awards night, movie nights and informational parent workshops. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent involvement will increase by 5% in attendance rates as measured by Parent Communication Logs, sign-in sheets from Parent Association meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences, and Parent Workshops. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent-Student Activity Nights All students All parents October 2018-June 2019 Administrators and teachers CS 67x will provide parents and students with opportunities to spend time together by participating in various activities. Some nights will include movie night, game night, parent and student paint night. Students will be selected based on PBIS rewards. CS 67x will host a Curriculum Night that will provide exposure to presentations by classroom teachers on problem solving, building vocabulary, and strategies for increasing reading comprehension. Presentations will also include looking at and understanding CCLS. All students All parents September 2018-June 2019 Administrators and teachers In addition, workshops will focus on best practices for helping students with disabilities or English Language Learners at home. We will have our Parent Coordinator organize workshops for parents in English and Spanish, to learn about academic programs and how to help prepare their child to be college and career ready. All students and Families CS 67x will host a Career Day and enlist parents to celebrate their various careers and speak to children about different career paths. All teachers and parents will be encouraged to utilize class DOJO to keep track and engage in an ongoing discussion of student behavior and monitor academic success. Class DOJO is a website that brings teachers, students and parents closer together through frequent communication. Class DOJO provides positive reinforcement and is a classroom management tool as well. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students, Families and Community All teachers and parents September 2018-June 2019 November 2018 Administrators, teachers and Parent Coordinator Administrators , Teachers, Parent Coordinator September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, coaches and teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  We are currently partnered with Phipps. They are our community based organization that helps bring parents into our school through shows, and workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Resources include books, articles, materials for activities, laptops, Promethium board and document cameras for workshops.  Time allocated for parent workshops and learning sessions during parent engagement time.  Grade leaders, Parent Coordinator, social worker, and volunteers including parent volunteers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, activity logs from workshops and attendance sheets will be tallied, converted into percentages and compared to the previous logs to monitor progress towards our 5% increase goals. We are progressing towards our goal. We will continue to hold workshops and other events to ensure an increase in parental involvement. *During our progress monitoring in February 2019, we have found that parental involvement has increased by 5%. We have held Family Movie Nights, Parent Paint Night, Writing Celebrations and a Dinner Dance for families to celebrate their child's accomplishments. We will continue to hold events such as a Student Awards Nights and Parent Cooking Classes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets to reflect parental involvement. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Beginning of the year assessment (once) grades 3-5 F & P grades K-2 In class assessments(weekly) Unit assessments (monthly) Students performing at a level 2 or below as determined by data from NYS ELA assessments and observational data. Beginning of the year assessments In class assessments from Go Math and end of chapter assessments (monthly) Students performing at a level 2 or below as determined by data from NYS Math assessments and observational data. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) In the classroom, teachers will utilize tiered intervention strategies and activities provided by Reading Street. In addition, teachers will provide targeted instruction through guided reading groups. Small group targeted instruction provided by, SETSS, ESL, or Speech provider depending on student needs. Guided reading for targeted instruction provided by the classroom teachers. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day. After school program for grades 3 through 5. In the classroom, teachers will provide tiered intervention through Go Math. In the classroom, teachers will provide support through small group instruction. During the school day all grades Differentiated Instruction Intensive interventions will be provided by SETSS and Math Coach 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43 In the classroom, teachers will provide support through small group instruction. During the school day and during science instructional time. In the classroom, teachers will provide support through small group instruction During the school day, during the social studies instructional time Small group One to One During the school day Science In class assessments End of unit assessments (quarterly) Social Studies In class assessments End of unit assessments (quarterly) Students exhibiting problem behavior or in crisis. PPC referrals by teachers, administrators or parents’ concerns At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Classroom teachers will provide Tier 1 intervention; additional support will be given to those students who require further instructional strategies in writing responses. Classroom teachers will provide Tier 1 intervention; additional support will be given to those students who require further instructional strategies in writing responses. Behavior Intervention Plans and/or Crisis Intervention Plans to be developed base on student needs. In addition, Tier 2 and 3 PBIS strategies will be used to provide positive behavior supports. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We have 33 students. We provide uniforms, book bags, and school supplies. Through our partnership with the department of health, they provide free vision testing and glasses as needed. We also provide at-risk services when needed. Through our partnership with our Phipps Community Based Organization, their staff works with our students that have a history of chronic absenteeism and have lunch with students at least three times a week and they also push into the classrooms for small group instruction. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  N/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We are currently using many resources to try to hire HQT. These sources some which I have listed, provide us with the teachers qualifications including their licensing. It is our expectation that through our collaboration and continued professional development, we will be able to retain and keep our HQT. The Office of Teacher Recruitment and Quality (TRQ) regularly host online and campus-based informational events for prospective teachers. These sessions are a great way to learn more about teaching in New York City, as well as our Online Teacher Application and hiring process. Recruiting Teaching Fellow : The New York City Teaching Fellows program is preparing a critical mass of exceptional teachers committed to a better future for the NYC students who need them most. Recruiting New Teachers via Teacher Finder Portal : Now we are able to recruit most talented and qualified teachers via the Teacher Finder Portal. https://nyc.teacherssupportnetwork.com/ntf/Home.do The New Teacher Center has helped to provide professional learning opportunities for new teachers with their mentors. We also have two model teachers in the building who are also mentors for new teachers. Each Summer, we hold a week of professional learning activities for new teachers in our "New Teacher Academy". 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Principal and Assistant Principal : Administration will continue to be involved in various professional developments opportunities. Administration will also participate in book clubs focused on extending their professional learning as well as the ELI professional development series. (Executive Leadership Institute) Administration ceates a professional learning calendar based on student data from the June Instructional Report as well as teacher data from Advance. Additionally, we also input teacher suggestions to create differentiated 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  professional learning sessions each week. During these PD's, we build on lesson planning off the common core learning standards, and assess the rigor of lessons based of the CCLS. Teachers and paraprofessionals: Selected teachers and paraprofessionals will attend the Bronx Field Support Center for available meetings if the workshops are aimed for instructional practices. All staff are exposed to professional learning through our partnering organization of Generation Ready. The sessions are highly structured and focused on instructional practices geared through the CCSS. Administration also provides professional development based on needs observed through observations. This learning takes place during our Monday afternoon sessions as well as through Professional periods. New Teacher Mentoring Teachers who are new to the teaching profession are assigned to a mentor by the principal. We also have two model teachers in the building who open their classrooms for inter-visitations. We also have a "New Teacher Academy" every Summer which entails a week of professional learning sessions. On-going professional development: The school utilizes all the professional development day opportunities to provide on-going professional development. Each teacher has an individual professional development plan. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). T/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). The school participates in visiting the students in the local daycare and their parents. We discuss what C.S. 67x has to offer their children. We share our curriculum and discuss parent activities. Parents and daycare providers share with the school needs based on students’ academic and emotional needs thus far. As a school, we reach out to the preventive services that are currently working with them, to ensure the continued support. We will give students in pre-k a reading list to help them prepare for kindergarten along with worksheets that will help bridge the gaps. The office of Early Childhood provides books for pre-k students and their families to prepare them for elementary school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  We also offer an open house in June to educate parents of the expectations as they move from Pre-K to Kindergarten (every Tuesday in June). We also schedule a classroom visit for Pre-k students to visit kindergarten classrooms. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Grade teams and the vertical teacher teams meet with administration on a weekly basis. The vertical team is involved in the MOSL seletion and has input on the assessment calendar such as deciding on simulations and partake in the creation of chapter tests. Along with the data specialist, teachers break down the data through item skill analysis. Teachers along with administration have also worked together to compile resources from EngageNY, Go Math and Think Central to create student notebooks for math. Teachers review the assessments and decide which would work best to measure the students' understanding. Teachers also utilize exit slips as a form of assessment, which helps drive next day instruction. Administration analyzes the advance data to create a differentiated professional learning calendar. Teachers also provide input on the professional learning that would help support them. Many teachers also take active roles in leading PD's for their colleagues. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X n/a X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A n/a 5A and 5C n/a 5A Section 6, Section 7 n/a Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 550,310.00 o 90,690 o 12,366 0 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,849,540.00 X 5A, 5B, 5C 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 67x, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community.community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students CS 67 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills, and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) CS 67x ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial, and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings, and other activities to be sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate, and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy, and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with theEvery Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation, and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our CS strategy is to provide support via small group instruction. Our Community based organization is working in collaboration with the school by providing group leaders to work with teachers in the classroom. Each group leader works for two hours targeting small group instruction based on teacher input. The impact thus far has been more student engagement, and targeted instruction. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. We will be working on increasing our student attendance by 3% by June 2018. Through attendance meetings, students will be identified and immediate outreach to families will be conducted. There will be monthly attendance celebrations where students will receive awards for their attendance. The CBO will assist by making calls to parents of students that are not present during the school day. Where necessary, home visits will be conducted in collaboration of the attendance teacher and CBO group leader. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Achieving our attendance goal will help us target and reach all students academically. Our academic gaols are to show growth on both the ELA and Math state exams as well as moving students reading levels. Through ensuring students are attending school daily, we will be able to provide daily rigorous and targeted instruction during the school day and extended practice after-school and at home. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Phipps Low-leveled readers Small Group Instruction Goal To help scholars move at least two reading levels by June 2018. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources that will be utilized are I-Ready, Reading A-Z, News ELA, Ready workbooks, Spotlight, and Leveled Literacy Intervention. Staff will push in to classrooms to work with small groups of studnets. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2. Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  3. 4. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Mrs. Shkreli, Assistant Principal and Joseph Vereen, CBO leader, will work together to ensure that the needs of all students are met through strategic programming. In collaboration with the teachers, targeted students will be identified and staff will have multiple resources to help support the small groups of students that will work with during the school day and continue to support after-school. The administration and Community School director will continually meet to analyze student data and draw conclusions on data trends. The data will help leaders collaborate and turn-key important instructional trends to the staff in order to effectively meet the needs of our students. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Community partners and C.S. 67 administration will set up times to meet in order to support our goals. The meetings will be organized around the discourse of data (formative and summatiive data). Data will be used to inform next steps for instruction, the grouping of students and will be integrating into the planning of lessons. Appropriate interventions will be identified by looking the Fountas and Pinnell levels, the item analysis of the State Exam and will be revisiting through Ready Simulations and unit exams. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Teachers will be scheduled to meet with the staff of the community school program in order to collaborate and discuss targeted instructional practices. Schedules will be provided to all stakeholders. Instructional resources such as I-Ready, Ready workbooks, Leveled Literacy Intervention booklets, Spotlight booklets and access to Reading A-Z will be provided. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. We will begin in October 2017 until June 2018. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The direct instruction supplemental program rationale for our ENL population is to provide this group of students with strategic support to help them attain English Language proficiency as measured by the NYSESLAT and the NYS ELA exams and NYS Math Exam. C.S. 67 has approximately ELL students in grades K- 5 of which 30 will be selected from grades 2-5, representing the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding levels of proficiency. The program will consist of an after school and Saturday academy. After reviewing the scores collected from the NYSESLAT and ELA State exams we concluded that our students need to improve greatly in the areas of reading and writing. The trends suggest that our program needs to be tailored to improving these skills. According to the NYSESLAT results, more than 75% of our ELLs need support in phonics, reading comprehension, grammar, writing extended responses, and citing evidence. The after school program will run from January 2019- April 2019 and January 2019- April 2020 on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30pm-4:30pm., a total of 23 sessions. The Saturday Academy will run from February 2019 through March 2019 and February 2020-March 2020 a total of 7 sessions and will run from 9:00 a.m.-1:00 p.m. The ENL teacher and content teacher will work collaboratively to plan and design the curriculum and activities students will be engaged in. During the two hours both teachers will alternate between team-teaching, parallel teaching and separating students into flexible groups. The ENL teacher will directly support the ELLs during the content instructional time and use home language supports such as the Ipad translator and supplemental materials provided in the home language of the students. Some of the activities the students will be engaged in will be oral and written enrichment activities to strengthen their skills. Debates that will require students to research and topic, document findings, cite evidence, present to the class and speak their opinion and work as a team. Students will also be provided the opportunity to use the Imagine Learning software that records students oral language and assesses fluency and pronunciation. Students will also engage in a variety of close reading activities to strengthen their reading comprehension and understanding of an informational text. Rigorous questioning will also be introduced to strengthen their written explanations to sample questions from the ELA and NYSESLAT. The content will alternate between Science, math and Social Studies and all activities and lessons will have a Content and Language objective. The ratio of students to teachers will be 15:1. when moving to flexible groups the ENL teacher and Content area teacher will create new groups each week depending on improvement of the skills and level of proficiency. There are two classrooms available to the teachers and students should it be necessary, however they will mainly be teaching and learning in one classroom. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Students will alternate on the ipads and computers and there will be a set schedule for rotating the technology. Both the after school and Saturday programs will be conducted in English and the instruction will be focused on NYS Common Core Standards, ELA skills and Targets of Measurement. The instruction will follow interventions set by classroom teachers, the ENL teachers and SETTSS teacher. Data collected during the previous school year such as the NYSESLAT, ELA State Exam scores, periodic assessments and DRA levels will be used to tailor curriculum for the supplemental program. Our focus would be to improve our students' expressive language skills in reading and writing. There will be one certified ENL teacher and one common branch content area teacher; and instruction will be delivered in English with support in the student's home languages with the use of and Ipad translator. The materials to be purchased are as follows: Imagine Learning a computer/Ipad based program that provides interactive and adaptive language and literacy instruction. The software differentiates instruction for all students in all English proficiency levels. 30 Licenses are to be purchased for the 30 participating ENL students. In addition, at no cost to Title III funds, 30 mini IPads will be provided to students with additional access to electronic books and interactive lessons to support their acquisition of English and their ability to express their thoughts and ideas in a written format. Journals and stationary will be used to record and publish these extended responses. We will also be utilizing Continental's NY ELL's workbook for our Saturday program and Treasure Chest by McGraw-Hill will be utilized to support the after school program during the week. All records, notification to parents in their preferred language, student attendance, and correspondence pertaining to the program will be maintained in the designated Title III Binder located in the Assistant Principals Office. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: To improve teacher effectiveness we have conducted a survey to identify instructional areas where teachers need support in instructing the ENL population, which will enhance instructional excellence and improve student achievement. Furthermore, we have formed a partnership with NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual/ESL-Resource Network of Fordham University to conduct workshops to enhance classroom practices which target our ELL students. All classroom teachers will be greatly encouraged to attend these professional development sessions to offer equal access to learning for our ELL students. To support our ENL scholars we have two ENL teachers; one pushes into the classroom during ELA and math instruction while the other and pulls out our Emerging and Entering scholars to provide instruction which focuses on language acquisition. Our ENL teachers attend weekly professional learning sessions with our ELA (English Language Arts) coach and our Math coach to learn the same strategies which they can tailor to our ELL scholars during their periods. Each of our ENL teachers attends professional learning sessions provided by the Office of English Language Learners to stay abreast of new practices and research based strategies to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part C: Professional Development better support our scholars. In addition, our ENL teachers have various resources on the New York City Department of Education’s website including webinars, articles, a video library, lesson plans and links to the state’s education department other organizations (Harvard Graduate School and Stanford Graduate School) to remain up to date with recent practices. Our partnership with Fordham University will continue and the new NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual/Education-Resource Network or RBERN contact is Deirdre Danaher who invites our ENL teachers to professional learning opportunities at Fordham free of charge as well as conducts professional development trainings on ELL specific topics to the rest of our teaching staff. Through the lens of the EDAT targets the administration will work with the ENL teachers to attend and turnkey professional development from the following consulting firms: - Generation ready - Bronx Borough Field Support Center with direct support from Karyna Tejeda our district ELL Services Coordinator - NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network through Fordham University Some professional development sessions will also take place during the school day with the teachers as schedules permit. These sessions will run from December 2018 to May 2019 and December 2019 to May 2020 roughly every four to eight weeks for the ENL teacher and the content area teacher. In conjunction with the unit exams in both ELA and Mathematics, we will cover the following topics: Professional Development Plan Below are the professional learning sessions set-up for the current school year: Title Duration Provider Fee/Cost Data Review – NYS ELA & Math Spring 2018 results Sept 17, 2018 C.S. 67 Coaches Free District 12 ENL Liaison Meeting Sept 2018 Field Support Center - BX Free Datafolio Oct 15, 2018 NYSAA – Science & Social Studies Free District 12 ENL Liaison Meeting Oct 2018 Field Support Center - BX Free Effective Student Feedback Nov 19, 2018 C.S. 67 Coaches Free District 12 ENL Liaison Meeting Nov 2018 Field Support Center - BX 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part C: Professional Development Free Student Work Protocol Dec 17, 2018 Generation Ready District 12 ENL Liaison Meeting Dec 2018 Field Support Center - BX Free Differentiation vs. Scaffolding Jan 14, 2019 C.S. 67 Admin team/Generation Ready consultant District 12 ENL Liaison Meeting Jan 2019 Field Support Center - BX Free Practical Tools to Engage ELLs in Rigorous Instruction (1/4) Feb 11, 2019 Field Support Center - BX Free District 12 ENL Liaison Meeting Feb 2019 Field Support Center - BX Free Student Work Protocol – TC Writing Mar 11, 2019 C.S. 67 Coaches/ Admin Free District 12 ENL Liaison Meeting Mar 2019 Field Support Center - BX Free QTEL strategies Apr 15, 2019 C.S. 67 Coaches/ Admin Free District 12 ENL Liaison Meeting Apr 2019 Field Support Center - BX Free Targeted & Strategic Instruction for our ELLs beyond NYSESLAT May 13, 2019 Academy for Language & Technology Free District 12 ENL Liaison Meeting May 2019 Field Support Center - BX Free Practical Tools to Engage ELLs in Rigorous Instruction (2/4) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part C: Professional Development Jun 6, 2019 Field Support Center - BX Free District 12 ENL Liaison Meeting Jun 2019 Field Support Center - BX Free Enhanced Science Scope & Sequence Sept 2020 C.S. 67 Coaches/ Admin DOE Practical Tools to Engage ELLs in Rigorous Instruction (3/4) Oct 2020 Field Support Center - BX Free Guided Reading Nov 2020 C.S. 67 Coaches/ Admin Free Practical Tools to Engage ELLs in Rigorous Instruction (4/4) Dec 2020 Field Support Center - BX Free Our ENL teachers will return with agendas and certificates where applicable after they have completed their professional learning sessions; upon their return to school a copy will be placed in their permanent file. All records, notifications to parents in their preferred language, student attendance, Professional development agendas, and correspondence pertaining to the program will be maintained in the designated Title III Binder located in the Assistant Principals Office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: AT NO COST TO TITLE III C.S. 67 will continue to build upon the work being done in school and provide parents with basic content knowledge of literacy to support their child's academic achievement. We will backpack letters to parents inviting them to monthly meetings specifically addressing ELL concerns from November 2018 to May 2019. The topics below are a sample of what will be covered: Workshops will presented to all ENL parents regarding: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities * The NYS ELA exam * Understanding NYSESLAT Spring results {As a Parent how should I interpret this data?} * What is the F& P? {How can I accurately measure my Child's reading comprehension?} * What is STARS? What information regarding my child does this tool provide? How can I use this information as a parent to support what is done in the classroom? * How has the Common Core Learning Standards impacted ENL instruction? *Who helps me as the parent to know which questions to ask? * When and how do I voice questions about the NYC Education system and my child's needs? How involved should I be? * Cultural Community Event- This will include work stations demonstrating ENL strategies that will be used in the classrooms and light refreshments. At C.S. 67X we will continue to maintain a binder which various documents essential to our ENL program are housed including: Parental choice forms, Home Language Surveys, Entitlement forms, Parent workshops & agendas, Parent Attendance sheet, Requests for interpretation, Weekly ENL schedule and Student exam results for the year. Further, we will provide workshops for our ELL parents presented by our Math Coach, Literacy Coach and ENL Teachers. In addition, our teachers will implement a monthly newsletter to parents informing them of topics taught and upcoming events. Our school-wide notices are translated into Spanish for the majority of our ELL families. Finally, the Parent Coordinator and the school will continue to inform parents of monthly meetings by backpacking letters in English and Spanish. Additionally, invitations will be sent home inviting parents to all special functions; i.e. Holiday Assemblies, 100% Attendance Assemblies and Award Assembly Programs All records, notifications to parents in their preferred language, student attendance, and correspondence pertaining to the program will be maintained in the designated Title III Binder located in the Assistant Principals Office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum 5,579.80 @ $60.65 per hour with fringe benefits for two teachers in the afterschool program. 3,396.4 @ $60.65 per hour with fringe benefits for one teacher in the Saturday Program. 0 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. The salary will support two teachers at $60.65 which is the cost with fringe benefits for the after school program. The Saturday Academy will support one teacher at $60.65. At no cost to Title III 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $ 916.80 development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $2,473.00 Travel Other TOTAL none none 12,366 Continental's NY ELL's workbook, Treasure Chest workbook by McGraw-Hill and NYSESLAT workbooks. Imagine learning licenses to support student learning. none 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name The Mohegan School Borough Bronx School Number 067 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jeffrey Santiago Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lauren Rivera-ENL Luis Merchan Teacher/Subject Area n/a Teacher/Subject Area n/a Related-Service Provider n/a Superintendent n/a Assistant Principal Donna Ferguson Coach n/a School Counselor n/a Parent n/a Parent Coordinator n/a Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 611 Total number of ELLs 71 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.62% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 0 4 0 0 2 0 0 5 0 0 6 0 0 7 0 0 8 0 0 9 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Beginning in the fall of 2017 we will test students utilizing the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment (Benchmark Assessment System) for all students in K-5. After analysis of the last round of BAS results we will use the results to create targeted small groups to based on students performance levels and specific areas of weakness. At the timeof this writing we have reviewed the end of year DRA results for our current ELL students which revealed the following: 35.7% (5/14) of Kindergarten students are reading on level but 64.3% (9/14) are reading below level. In our first grade 93.3% (14/15) of the LL students are reading below grade level and 6.7% (1/15) are reading on grade level. In our second grade 8.3% (1/12) are non-readers and 91.7% (11/12) are reading below grade level. In third grade 14.3% (2/14) are non-readers while 85.7% (12/14) are reading below 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  grade level. In fourth grade 85.7% (6/7) are reading below grade level while 14.3% (1/7) are non-readers. Finally, in fifth grade 80% (8/10) are reading below grade level while 20% (8/10) are reading below grade level and 10% (2/10) are reading on grade level. We will administer the BAS exam 3 times (October 2017, December 2017, March 2018 and May 2018) to track and monitor student reading levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In the fall of 2017 we will have two full time ENL teachers, each person will work closely across grade bands K-2 and 3-5. Each ENL teacher will provide ENL instruction in one classroom on a grade level in addition to a pull-out program. Each ENL teacher's schedule will support the grades they are assigned to maximize the time during the school day. This schedule will also allow them to attend grade level meetings to collaborate with the classroom teachers and be aware of curriculum changes or approaches the grade team decides to implement. The ENL teachers will have consistent access to student data (both formative and summative) to inform the development of their lessons to support the ELLs they service. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ELL Periodic Assessments are given to our students in order for us to have data to drive instruction. Once we get these scores back, we can determine what areas ELLs need more support in. Once the area of need is determined for the student, this information is shared with other teachers to help support this area. The Periodic Assessment allows teachers to give each child support in specific areas. The Periodic Assessment was given to our school last year in order for us to have data to drive instruction. We administered the exam in the in the Fall semester and discovered that many of our long term ELL students were doing well in the listening section but needed more support with reading and writing in English. We shared this information with the classroom teachers to ensure that teachers are able to give these students support in reading and writing. In addition, our ELL students will also participate in the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System for Reading as well as the Teacher's College on-demand assessments in Writing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data (NYS English Language Arts exam, NYS Mathematics exam, DRA spring results, inventory exams and Periodic Assessments) have been gathered and reviewed we identify areas of weakness in alignment with the NYSESLAT. Historically our ELL students have not performed well in reading and writing on the NYSESLAT which is consistent with results from assessments listed above. We pull the students identified by these exams into small groups for more individualized attention and invite them to attend an after-school and/or a Saturday program. Students residing in the US for less than a year will be given support by using listening CDs and various computer programs (i.e. Imagine Learning) to help them see and hear the sounds at the same time in order to become familiar with English. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our teachers use the results of all classroom assessments as well as teacher observations to monitor students' progress in English acquisition measured by their test results and classroom participation. After analysis of this Tier I data teachers place students in small groups, given additional time and type of ENL methods to move into a Tier II phase to address deficiencies. The use of native instruction whenever possible during this Tier II phase is also implemented to ensure students benefit from this intervention. Additional assessments are made to identify student growth and area/s of improvement or continued need. Finally, Tier III interventions are provided by a bilingual educator, ENL teacher, a coach with a strong background in literacy or a SETSS (Special Education Teacher Support Specialist) to provide one to one intensive literacy instruction. Tier III instruction may need to last for a significant period of time to record even minimal progress and to allow adjustments to instruction. Students who have been instructed with research-based reading interventions that traditionally show improved outcomes may require highly individualized reading instruction that considers other factors such as lack of focus, language and vocabulary development, and behavior problems. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. For our ELL students in grades four and five we have traditionally used the NYS ELA and Math test results along with NYSESLAT to drive the focus of our ENL program. These results are analyzed and used by the classroom teacher as well as the ENL teacher and the SETSS teacher as a guide by highlighting areas of strength and weakness. Analysis of our spring 2016 NYS ELA results revealed a range of results with long term ELLs making greater progress towards attaining grade level expectations. Our analysis revealed 61.6% (26/42) of our former LLs scored at least a level 2 on the newly Common Core aligned ELA exam, however, 38% (16/42) scored a level 1. The mathematics results for the same group showed 33% (14/42) scored a level 1 while 50% (21/42) scored a level 2 but 16.4% scored in levels 3 and 4. In comparison our current LL students significantly lower on both exams; on then NYS ELA exam 67.7 % (21/31) scored level 1, 9.6% (3/31) scored a level 2 and 22.5% (7/31) were not tested in ELA. The mathematics results for the same group showed 77.4% (24/31) scored level 1, 9.6% (3/31) scored level 2 and 3.2% (1/31) scored a level 3. The fourth grade ELL students who took the NYS Science exam performed even better on that exam; 7.4% (2/27) scored a level 1, 22.2% (6/27) scored a level 2 and 66.5% (13/27) scored in levels 3 and 4. Based on these results the evidence clearly demonstrates the success of the efforts of the classroom teacher as well as the ENL teacher in the face of a new and more rigorous exam. We administered the Developmental Reading Assessment (DRA2) to test the reading comprehension of students in grades K-5 but especially those not assessed by a standardized exam. Traditionally we administer this assessment four times a yearto consistently measure students' growth in reading are tested. Analysis of the spring 2017 DRA2 results showed 64.3% (9/14) Kindergarten students are reading below grade level; 35.7% (5/14) are reading on grade level. In the first grade 6.7% (1/15) is reading on grade level while 93.3% (14/15) reading below grade level. In second grade 8.3% (1/12) is a non-reader while 91.7% (11/12) are below level. In the third grade 14.3% (2/14) are non-readers while 85.7% (12/14) are below level. In fourth grade 14.3% (1/7) is a non-reader while 85.7% (6/7) are below grade level. In grade five 80% (8/10) are below level while 20% (2/10) are on grade level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The administration meets with teachers including the ENL staff to analyze summative test results of our ELL students to identify patterns across proficiency levels in each testing grade. The ENL teacher attends weekly grade level meetings during the school day to plan and discuss student progress with the classroom teachers. Teachers also have a data meeting time on Tuesday afternoons from 3:05 pm to 3:35 pm as additional meeting times to continue planning and making adjustments to the curriculum as needed to support the ELL population. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELL program at C.S. 67 implements a pull out ENL program for grades K, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. Our ELLs are grouped according to grades and mandated time. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher will service the students as follows in accordance with the new Part 154.2 regulations. Entering students will receive 180 mins a week of Stand Alone ENL services and 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA. Emerging students will receive 90 minutes of Stand Alone ENL services, 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes a week os Stand Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area. Transitioning students will receive 90 minutes a week of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes a week of Stand Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area. Expanding students will receive 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA or tother content area. Lastly, Commanding students will recive 90 minutes a week of Integrated ENL in ELA or Content Area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our pull-out ENL classroom our ENL teachers employ the Direct Method and Immersion (all instruction is done in English) utiliziling the following strategies and approaches: Choral speaking, poetry, reader’s theater, and language experience techniques. Reading, writing, and math skills are reinforced focusing on conventions of grammar and usage. Our ENL teachers also utilize Sheltered English with the materials listed below: Realia; ESL video programs; Rosetta Stone with speech recognition; Santillana: Intensive English Learning System; SRA ELL Photo Library; Dolch List-Grade level approriate sight words, ELL handbook from Reading Street; Read Write, Edit and Listen and the Common Core Clinics and the Fundations Curriculum for the lower grades. In addition, instruction includes graphic organizers, TPR (Total Physical Response), and teacher modeling. Scaffolding techniques and differentiation are used to facilitate learning. ELLs are monitored formally through ELL Periodic Assessments and informally by observations. Data is collected by classroom teachers and the ENL teachers. The teachers meet at weekly meetings to analyze data and discuss skills to be taught. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? While the school uses student's native language as a support to furtuer explain tasks and concepts, the only official assessment in the native language in done with the Spanish LAB for Spanish speaking students that are identified as ELLs with the LAB-R. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. To address the needs of students with interrupted formal education (SIFE) teachers offer additional instruction time during their professional preparation periods and 50 minute program that is offered twice a week. The additional instruction time allows the teachers to target specific areas to help those academic gaps. Appropriate leveled materials for SIFE learning are gathered by the teacher, along with the Literacy and Math coaches. b. ELLs in school less than three years are supported by cooperative learning and peer teaching (buddy system) in the classroom. Websites such as Starfall.com are available to the student and to the classroom teacher to help support the student in the classroom. Extended day programs focus on support instruction for ELA and Math. Students also have laptops and I pads to help facilitate the English language development. c. There are various intervention programs at this school that provide additional support in ESL, math and other content areas for ELLs receiving services for 4 to 6 years. These students are also offered additional help for 50 minutes two times a week. These students are invited to attend the After School ESL Program to help support them in areas of need. Communication with the classroom teacher is an ongoing process to help these students reach their goals. d. Long term ELLs are provided with support to help them learn the language. They are grouped with students at the same 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  level as them to provide them with additional support in learning the language. These students are provided with various intervention strategies to enhance their skills in reading, writing, listening and speaking. These students also receive an extra 50 minutes two times a week to provide support in ELA and Math. These students are also invited to attend the After School ESL Program to help support them in areas of need. The ESL Teacher works closely with the classroom teacher to identifiy strategies to help these students. e. There is a plan in place at C.S. 67 for continuing transitional support for ELLs reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT. Teachers are made aware of the presence of these students in their classes. They are held to the same expectations as their monolingual peers in their classes. Additionally, extra materials are given to the students’ teachers, extra communication is established with the parent and if needed, the students are pulled out for extra help for continuing transitional support. These students are granted the same accommodations as present ELLs on state exams as per mandated NYC testing accommodations for two years following their gaining a proficient score on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ESL teacher utilizes an interactive smart board for daily lessons with students of all ability levels, especially the intermediate and advanced groups. However, students new to the country are placed with laptops and headset to hear stories in English using the Audio lingual method from the Starfall website. The use of Treasures ESL program which includes photographs and writing prompts is used to aid students in developing writing expression and comprehension. The online ESL program BrainPOP is also used to support fluency in speech, grammar and vocabulary on both the computer and Ipads. Our ESL teacher communicates with the classroom teachers and service providers to identify areas of weakness students have and in a small group work with grade level materials to reteach content areas of reading and mathematics. The instructional programs we have currently implemented are Common Core aligned; Reading Street and GoMath each have specific strategies identified in each lesson to address ELL students to gain understanding of the concept and topics taught. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have curricular maps created by teachers and administrators on every grade level which reflect specific ELL strategies per lesson. Our ENL teacher then meet weekly with classroom teachers to update them on student progress based on the instructional focus of the week. Our ELL-SWD student goals are reviewed and used as a guide in lesson planning for specific grade and ability levels with multiple entry points for all students to access the concept being taught. All tasks are completed and taught in English by the ENL teacher, students are grouped according to ability across grade bands for example K,1 & 2 beginners and intermediates are one grouped together to provide appropriate instruction and meet mandated time requirements. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our ELL students who took the New York State English Language Arts exam as well as those ELL students who will take the exam for the first time in spring of 2018 are enrolled in our 120 minute after-school program. This program is taught by licensed teachers in the content of literacy in English. Students are in groups of no more than twenty individuals, this group includes students with disabilities. Through the size of the group students are given more individualized attention and feedback on their work and support in breaking down the task. We have taken this targeted instruction further this year by placing all students who will take the NYS ELA for the first time in 2018 regardless of the grade into one group with our ESL teacher. We will continue to offer an after-school program for our advanced students in grades 3-5 to better prepare them for the NYS ELA exam especially in the area of writing. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  The ENL teacher will service the students as follows in accordance with the new Part 154.2 regulations. Entering students will receive 180 mins a week of Stand Alone ENL services and 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA. Emerging students will receive 90 minutes of Stand Alone ENL services, 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes a week os Stand Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area. Transitioning students will receive 90 minutes a week of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes a week of Stand Alone ENL or Integrated ENL/Content Area. Expanding students will receive 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL/ELA or tother content area. Lastly, Commanding students will recive 90 minutes a week of Integrated ENL in ELA or Content Area. Every year at CS 67, current ESL programs and offerings are examined and assessed based on student need, teacher availability, scheduling, and parent choice. After speaking to parents at the parent orientation meetings and parent/teacher conferences, the ESL teacher assess the parents’ articulated feelings in regards to the education of their ELL child. It has been found that parents overwhelmingly prefer the current freestanding ESL program that is in place. In the past, a dual language program was considered in the school, however the number of ELLs along with parent support was not sufficient to support this type of program. In addition, we would like to offer an afterschool program for parents who want to learn English and gain English Language proficiencywith our ESL teacher, this consideration is based on the availability of funding to provide these additional services. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLS are given the same opportunities as every other student at CS 67. All extracurricular and in school supplemental services are offered to them. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. For our ENL program we use Reading Street, MYON online literature database that students can access in school and at home, Fundations writing program, Computers, Apple Ipads, Eno Board, tape recorders, audio CDs, and Literature in Home Language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home Language Support is delivered 25% of the time in our freestanding ESL program in the way of teacher translation, student to student translation and home language support, and literacy tools such as books, picture dictionaries, and bilingual dictionaries are available for student use to enrich content and make it comprehensible. We also have a buddy system in place that teachers implement in their classrooms. Other content area teachers, the parent coordinator, and administrative staff are available to translate or deliver instruction where appropriate and as necessary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teacher used the data from the NYSESLAT to group students across grade bands based on ability such as 3rd, 4th and 5th grade advance students are instructed together to address time and ability mandates. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school uses the first, second, and the rooms on one out of the three hallways in the third floor to allow the ELLs to meet either in the classroom or in a separate room within the three floors. The other school uses the rooms on the other three hallways in the third floor, the fourth and fifth floor. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We offer parent orientation sessions throughout the school year based on curriculum needs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ELL personnel will receive 17 1/2 hours per school year of ELL specific professional Development. ELL teachers are regularly invited to attend Network training sessions specifically directed toward the effective instruction of ELLs throughout the 2017-2018 school year. These trainings may include topics related to compliance issurs for the school, ELLs, or ESL instruction, literacy and content area instructional practices for ELLs. In addition, assessment analysis for ELLs and best school wide practices for ELLs based on the ESL standard and Common Core Standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To implement the 6 hours of ELL trainings for teaches of our ELL population, staff attend a variety workshops pertaining to scaffolding instruction for ELLs on Monday afternoons. Additionally classroom teachers attend workshops pertaining to scaffolding instruction for ELLs provided by our Fordham University consultant and the Generation Ready consultant. The ENL teachers also attend trainings provided by the Office English Language Learners throughout the school year. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent involvement at The Mohegan School/CS 67 includes, but is not limited to; participation in monthly PA meetings. Parents are notified of meetings via letter which is published in both English and Spanish and is distributed as the need arises. As stated earlier, parents of newly enrolled ELLS are invited to parent orientation meetings in order to establish and maintain communication regarding their child’s progress in school and more specifically in ESL. Contact and communication with parents is also established through our bilingual parent coordinator who reaches out and talks extensively with the parents of ELLs. All parents are invited to school at the beginning of the year for a “meet and greet.” Teachers meet with parents in the classroom to explain the grade expectations; the curriculum in each subject area and the grading system; school policies regarding class work, supplies, homework, discipline and uniform and the Fifty minute and the ESD program. Teachers will also suggest strategies to help their child (children) at home. The purpose is to help parents help their children to learn and work effectively, as well as to establish and maintain positive relationships between students, parents, and teachers as the children progress through the grade levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are consistently invited to school and encouraged to express their needs with school staff including classroom teachers, support staff, administration, and the parent coordinator. It is our hope that if the needs of parents and families are not being met, that parents feel comfortable and confident enough to voice this to someone on our staff. In addition, the parents of ELLs specifically are encouraged to fill out a survey following the receipt of information at our parent orientation meetings. This is used to evaluate whether parents understand the academic choices available to ELLs and whether or not they feel comfortable with the choice they have made. Also, many steps are taken to ensure that parents fill out the school survey distributed by the Department of Education, the results of which are published and made accessible to school staff and the public. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. no additional information at this time. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jeffrey Santiago, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Mohegan School School DBN: 12X067 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jeffrey Santiago Title Principal Donna Ferguson Assistant Principal n/a Parent Coordinator Lauren Rivera ENL/Bilingual Teacher n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other n/a Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 09/08/2017 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X067 School Name: P.S. 67- Mohegan School Superintendent: Espinal Pacheco The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yolanda Joshua Donna Almodovar Garcia Ferguson Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal Yes No No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During registration, home language surveys are distributed to parents/guardians to determine the parents’ dominate language. Based on the information provided in these documents and responses to verbal questions we are able to identify the parent's preferred language for written and oral communication. When parents are contacted by the school staff we refer to the Emergency Blue Card for the preferred language to conduct conversations. Most of our parents read English and/or Spanish, the parent of our Chinese students have asked for English documents as their eldest child serves as an interpreter during parent meetings. We have families who speak Spanish, Fulani, Italian and Mandingo. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written 615 298 66.34 32.15 613 300 Oral Preferred Percent Oral 66.13 32.36 English Spanish 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent/ Teacher Conference September 2017 November 2017 March 2018 May 2018 Administration drafts the parent letter then the ENL teacher and/or the Pupil Personnel Secretary translate letters to inform parents of each meeting. Event letters September 2017-June 2018 ENL teacher Letters for specific child September 2017-June 2018 ENL teacher Pupil Personnel Secretary Pupil Personnel Secretary 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Disciplinary Meetings Nov 2017 - June 2018 Parent /Teacher Conference Sept/Nov Parent Engagement Meetings Tuesdays - 2017-2018 Mar/May IEP Meetings Sept 2017-June 2018 School Staff ENL teacher School Staff ENL teacher School Staff School Staff ENL teacher 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school messenger contacts all parents via the telephone number submitted on students' Emergency Blue Cards in the language specified by the parent at the time of admission. Our messages are delivered in English and Spanish. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will train staff members on the various resources available to them during the course of the school year to provide them with assistance in communicating with parents. We will include this information in our staff handbook which is distributed each year to all members of the staff and review it verbally. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Welcome Poster 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  Parent Bill of Rights Parent Guide to Language Access Language ID Guide at security desk and main office Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will have our Parent Coordinator gather information via surveys during Parent Association meetings and during School Leadership meetings. We will also provide simple surveys at Parent/Teacher conferences as well as our weekly Tuesday meetings to provide an opportunity for parents to let us know how we can be more supportive and in what way(s). We presently have a suggestion box in the lobby of the school to provide parents another way to give us feedback anonymously which our parent coordinator checks weekly. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84 
