2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 08X075 P.S. 075 Principal: MARINES ARRIETA-CRUZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 08X075 718 860-4480 Fax: Email Address: TErickson2@schools.nyc.gov School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 75 School of Research and Discovery 320800010075 PK-5 984 Faile Street Bronx NY 718-860-1630 Phone Number: TheraErickson School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 8 Superintendent’s Office Address: Marines Arrieta-Cruz Carol Ehrenpreis Aracelis Cancel TheraErickson StarasiaPatterson-Brown N/A N/A N/A District Information Dr. ErikaTobia Superintendent: 1230 Zerega Ave. Bronx NY 10473 KTobia@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-828-6653 Phone Number: 718-828-2760 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx NY 10472 JRuiz@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Marines Arrieta-Cruz Carol Ehrenpries AracelisCancel N/A StarasiaPatterson-Brown N/A N/A N/A TheraErickson Laura Pagoada-Mellado Raquel Soto Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT/SLTCo-chair/Teacher Member/ UFT/SLTCo-chair/Teacher Member/ UFT/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rosa Betancourt Troy Hill GirinaMatos N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We will celebrate our community’s cultural diversity and create opportunities for all students to become responsible and productive adults in the 21st century. Our vision at P.S. 75 is to educate the whole child is a safe and happy school environment. Within this environment, our students will be provided with the necessary tools to experience successful academic and emotional growth. 2018-19 CEP 9  Our mission is to ensure success for all our students. The PS 75 community will continue to work towards achieving higher standards and preparing teacher to support our students personal and academic growth. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 75 is an up and coming school located in the Hunt’s Point section of the South Bronx with over 600 students in grades Pre-K - 5 and has a 60/40 ratio of boys to girls. In addition to our Black and Latino students, we have a diversity of cultures represented in our school including students from African countries and the Middle East. Our school is located in an area below the poverty line and a large percentage of students are in temporary housing. 100% of our student population receives free school lunch. Our school wide attendance goal is 93% daily. Our data indicates improved attendance ranging from 86% to 94% daily. Attendance is reviewed daily, weekly and monthly by the attendance officer, main office and City Year in an effort to improve academics and provide routines. In our continued effort to improve our student achievement, increase learning opportunities and engage our community through positive partnerships we have identified strengths and weaknesses that will guide our collective efforts to attain our goals. We have seen an increase in our ELA and Math data, summative and formative assessments this year. In order to maintain this growth we have identified a number of consultancies and programs that are designed to address our specific needs. The National Training Network Consultancy aims at improving mathematics instruction with problem solving strategies, modules of lessons and classroom support. The Generation Ready Consultancy aims at providing support in improving the enactment of the reading and writing workshops . Both consultants provide professional development, demo lessons that provide rigor, accountable talk and engagement, in addition to providing feedback to teachers and administration. In a collaborative and ongoing effort they look at the data and curriculum, so that growth and needs can be identified and addressed. Other ongoing consultants address physical and emotional needs such as Playworks and Studio in a School; these consultants support our students during recess and in the classroom. With the full support from our administration, staff, parents and community, we will provide standard-based academic opportunities that will challenge and enable our students to reach their full academic potential. We pride ourselves in opening our school to serve the community. Our Parent Coordinator’s office facilitates parent workshops in the content areas and a plethora of parent issues. Parents participate in art classes and trips to local museums and other cultural venues. Each year, we open our school on Thanksgiving Day. Staff members proudly volunteer their time and donate meals to help feed the needier members of our community. Parent University is a school guide to inform parents about community/school events, Parent-Teacher Association meetings, standardized testing schedules, calendar days and Super Tuesday workshops. Our PTA organizes family day trips, weekly evening exercise classes and community/family nights (Paint Night, Movie Night, Skate Day Trip). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our data indicates that the majority of our English Language Learners (13% of our total school population) and Students With Disabilities (17% of our total school population) scored at Level 1 in the English Language Arts and Math State Assessments. From our most current English Language Arts assessment data, we have determined that our students are in need of additional supports in reading fluency, comprehension and writing skills. In math, our students are in need of additional support in problem solving and constructed responses. Specific data used is as follows; iReady Diagnostic, three times a year (fall, winter, spring); Measure of Student Learning (MOSL), twice a year (fall and spring); Fountas & Pinnell, three times a year (fall, winter, spring) and informal running records, Benchmark Literacy Unit Assessments, three weeks; On-Demand Writing Assessments Pre & Post, 5-6 weeks; ELA, Math, Science State Simulations, National Training Network (NTN) math modules, varies from 2 -4 weeks; Envisions (K-2) end of unit assessments, varies. School data is reviewed by teachers, grade bands, providers, administration, and consultants to identify student growth, needs and instructional gaps. Students with special needs range in disability classifications. Most of our SWDs are classified as Learning Disabled and Speech & Language Disorder. Students are supported in a range of environments from most restrictive to least restrictive. Currently we have two special classes (12:1), Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) from (Pre-K to 5th Grade), Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS), and 2018-19 CEP 10  Service Providers in speech, counseling, and contract OT and PT. We currently have four ELL classes and an ELL provider to support students. The students level of language range in proficiency. We currently have 13 entering, 14 emerging, 28 transitioning, 30 expanding, and 15 commanding students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Strong Family and Community Ties Strengths: Our Parent Coordinator’s office facilitates parent workshops in the content areas and a plethora of parent issues. Parents participate in art classes and trips to local museums and other cultural venues. Each year, we open our school on Thanksgiving Day. Staff members proudly volunteer their time and donate meals to help feed the needier members of our community. We celebrate spring at Pelham Bay Park, where the school hosts Family Field Day every year. Parent University is a school guide to inform parents about community/school events, Parent Teacher Association meetings, standardized testing schedules, calendar days and Super Tuesday workshops. Also, our school website is available in multiple languages and is updated daily. Needs: In order to assist our parents in becoming active participants in their children's education we identified the need to provide the following opportunities:  Saturday English as a New Language (ENL) Adult Classes - an experienced adult education teacher to provide English language skills that will enable our non-English speaking parents to communicate with teachers, daily living skills to become active participants in our community and become active in their children's educational process.  Parent University during Super Tuesdays (parent engagement) - utilize designated parent communication time to provide parents with a variety of workshops and opportunities that will engaged them in their own growth and provide them with resources to become more actively involved in our school. In order to address this need we will engage teachers, community based organizations, parent leaders and administrators. Rigorous Instruction: Our enacted curriculum includes New York State common core standards aligned programs as follows: Benchmark, a research based language arts program, with the use Lucy Calkins' Writing Units, Benchmark Literacy Reader's and Writer's Workshops, Envisions (K-2) Math standard based program and Key Elements to Mathematics Success (KEMS) (grades 3-5) . In addition, the New York City Department of Education Social Studies, Passport and Science curricula was utilized our content instruction. Strengths:  Curriculum materials are customized to our students' needs through a process of revision and adjustments made by teams of teachers that convene after school, during professional development time and over the summer.  Points of entry are included to address our English Language Learners and struggling students without sacrificing rigor. 2018-19 CEP 11   Lesson development follows the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Teachers are observed utilizing this rubric and provided with timely, actionable feedback directed at improving student engagement, rigor, questioning and assessment during the lesson. Needs: Continued professional development collaborations that is differentiated, job embedded and customized to our schools needs as follows:  Generation Ready for balanced reading and writing instruction  National Training Network for mathematics instruction  New York Historical Society to enhance our social studies instruction  Fundations phonics training to improve our teachers' understanding of best language strategies for new English Language Learners and special needs students. iReady-Diagnostic and Differentiated Instruction for reading and math  Great Leaps-fluency program   Technology- SMART board training and upgrade of equipment  Teachers College Reading and Writing Program-Select group of teachers piloting Reading and Writing Units of Study  The Master Teacher - The program offers a wide range of training courses that support students with disabilities in all areas. Paraprofessionals and teachers learn about communication with students and staff, strategies to support classroom instruction and how to manage specific student behaviors. Supportive Environment: Strengths: In order to achieve the goal of helping students become life-long learners, we have built into our instructional program partnerships with the City Year Group, a student led #Kindness Program, student of the month assembly, student council and student of the year celebration These partnerships and activities continue to enhance our school environment as well as student achievement through clubs, activities, and tutoring services. Additionally, our school focuses on the whole child by partnering with Urban Health, a full-service medical office on site, Dental Clinic, and Sheltering Arms after school program. Needs: Continued collaborations with partners and consultants to address our students' emotional well being, reduce stress levels and promote healthy habits of mind and body as follows:  Studio in a School - The consultants have students enjoy creative experiences as they learn to use art as a language to express themselves.  CookShop - Inactive lessons/curriculum foster a nutritious diet and active lifestyle. This is a hands-on nutrition education program.  Garden to Cafe Program - As part of the NYC DOE Wellness Policy, the program connects schools with community gardens with food tastings and activities during school lunch periods. The program supports instruction, influences healthy eating choices, increasing student consumption of fresh and locally grown produce.  New York Restoration Project: The program bring nature into the classroom and through a series of inactive lessons designed to prepare students for the field-based activities in the community garden. Participating classes seed, plant, test and measure soil and have garden to table celebrations. 2018-19 CEP 12   Marquis Studios Art Consultancies - The Circus – The consultants encourage teamwork that engage students and include teacher involvement. Students participate in balance and movement, trust and risk-taking activities that help focus and support exercise. Classes put on an end of year performance. Percussion – The consultant introduces different instruments and musical beats. Students learn about the origin and history of the music and instrument that is introduced. Technology is often incorporated, such as the smart-board. The instructor engages in discussion and student inquiry. Students enjoy are exposure and experimentation. Classes put on an end of year performance. Collaborative Teachers: Strengths: Collaborative planning time and inter-visitations are an integral part of programming which promotes our teachers’ efforts to continually grow professionally, including mentor programs. We have built time in our schedules to facilitate teachers' meetings during the day and after school on Mondays and Tuesdays. On Mondays, teachers participate in professional development workshops in a variety of topics following a six week cycle of study. On Tuesdays, teachers meet to conduct collaborative inquiry, data analysis, progress monitoring of our students' writing performance tasks, adjustment of curricula and lesson planning, special education progress, and individualized educational plan writing and reviews, parent workshops. Needs: In addition, our teachers would benefit from a variety of professional development opportunities including work with consultants from Generation Ready (English Language Arts), National Teaching Network for Math and other partnerships as follows:  Continued collaboration with Generation Ready to enhance teacher teams work in adjusting and modifying curriculum based on multiple data points.  Partnership with National Training Network to enhance our math team's ability to focus on problem solving and understanding of the standards of mathematical practices. Fundations - training for Early Childhood Teams to identify students' specific needs in reading fluency.   NY Historical Society Partnership to strengthen Social Studies inquiry protocols and content. Effective School Leadership: Strengths: Teachers have taken a leadership role in our school by leading professional development, grade decision making and curriculum mapping. Teachers have participated in the Department of Education led Teacher Leadership Programs and other Professional Opportunities outside of the ones provided in school. Needs: Continued participation in a variety of activities that promote teacher leadership and ownership of school decisions as follows:  Teacher Mentoring Program- teachers will learn protocols to support professional development activities, read articles and books on topics related to adult learning and lead professional development sessions at school. 2018-19 CEP 13   Teacher leaders to work with consultants from Generation Ready, National Training Network, New York Historical society to assist in the dissemination of lessons and units that support student progress.  City Year volunteers as tutors to support additional time on task in small instructional groups  Monday Professional Development and Tuesday Professional time spent on topics that improve instruction. 2018-19 CEP 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X075 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 632 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 34 32 28 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 57 37 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 88.0% % Reduced Lunch 14.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 71.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.1 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 68% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 64 61 90.0% 0.2% 19.6% 24.1% 0.9% 1.1% 6 2% 7.5 34.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A YSH NO YES N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have identified students successes and needs through standardized data, NYSESLAT, and curriculum assessments. We have shown improvement in ELA achievement. We have aligned ELA through cycles for the 2018-2019 school year / cross content. In mathematics we remained within a .75 percent point. Therefore we will be working with Generation Ready (Literacy Consultant) and Nation Training Network (Math Consultant as a team to scaffold and differentiate instruction, continue professional development and classroom support. To improve student outcomes, we identified the need to transition our writing curriculum to Units of Study by Lucy Calkins (4-6 weeks assessment), NYC Passport Social Studies curriculum (end units) and NTN lesson modules for 3-5 grade (assessment time varies in weeks). Strengths: ● Teacher Collaborations - looking at student work and analyzing student data in grade teams during professional development and work time (Mondays and Tuesdays extended work day). ● Curriculum Planning and implementation aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (Common Core Learning Standards) ● Use of Technology - iPads, computers and Smartboard interactions / iReady computer program has supported literacy growth (school assessments and standardized testing has shown increase in ELA). ● Professional Development Opportunities - provided through the network, consultants, teachers best practices ● Planning for Instruction - teams update curriculum based on students needs, align instruction to scaffold and differentiate to include the learning needs and styles of students. Needs: ● Consultants to provide additional Professional Development based on specific areas. ● Additional supports for students transitioning from grade to grade to meet expectations and bridge possible academic “gaps” / continue to look at student work and understanding through teams that are supported by consultants and utilize information to address specific needs of students 2018-19 CEP 16  ● Content based Professional Development such as New York Historical Society, Fundations Phonics Instructions/Training, Generation Ready Balanced Literacy, Teachers College Writing Project (first year for administrators, year 2 teachers) National Training Network Services (Math), District 8 designed Professional Learning Communities ● Materials to supplement curriculum for special populations / Tiers to support additional time on task in small instructional groups and support students at home with appropriate materials to support instruction. Students access iReady at home, workbooks and appropriate readers support learning and parent feedback is provided through the parent coordinator, PTA and during Super Tuesdays. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our goal for accelerating student learning in ELA and Math by:  Decreasing level 1 students in grade 3-5 in ELA and Math assessments by 3% as a result of a strong RTI model. Increasing level 3 students in grades 3-5 in ELA and Math assessments by 4% as a result of the implementation  of a strong curriculum supported by the use of data to inform next steps for students. As measured by Fountas and Pinnell Running records, BOY and EOY MOSL assessments, IReady instructional reports and State Data. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? This activities will support the implementation of this goal: Teachers Sept-Ongoing Jun 2018-19 ● Teachers ● Consultants  Balanced Literacy and Writer’s Workshop PD provided ● Administrators by Generation Ready consultant. Use of mentor materials such as Lucy Calkins Writing Units of Study. PD will focused on guided reading, reading/strategy groups, running records, teacher practice, modeling, vocabulary support, among other topics.  Time for teachers to meet collaboratively during the day, Monday Professional Development Time and Tuesday time assigned for other professional work. Teachers will engage in inquiry work, lesson planning, adjustment of curriculum and data analysis to improve the glows and grows of students including subgroups. (daily common prep / 1 period) ● Per session opportunities for a curriculum team to meet and develop units (Spring) ● Create and develop an Instructional Cabinet Team to analyze data, implement professional develop, and survey staff needs for instruction. ● PD Committee will plan professional development around consultants and information provided by the Instructional Cabinet team. Data dives will rotate reading, writing, mathematics and analyze student successes. 2018-19 CEP 18 ● Create and develop an RTI Team will implement a small group instructional plan designed to improve reading levels demonstrated by a decrease of 25% of Level 1 students. ● National Training Network consultancy to develop problem solving strategies aligned to Common Core Learning Standards expectations per grade. NTN PD will support problem solving strategies such as; data, scaffolding learning experience, key math vocabulary, integrated lessons and connections to real world problems. Teachers will engage in the study and practice of The Five Mathematical Practices Generation Ready professional development on strategies for guided and small group instruction, phonics instruction and use of Pathways checklists for students and teachers. Participation in District led Professional Learning Communities for Administrators and Teachers on Balanced Literacy. (monthly) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers Sept-Jun 2018-19 ● Teachers Administrators ● Consultants ● Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will provide teacher-lead parent workshops on Tuesdays during parent communication time on a variety of instructional topics such as iReady at Home Instruction, NYS Common Core Learning Standards, etc. Parents will be invited to attend workshops on nutrition and healthy eating during the school year (CookShop). The school website, automated calls, flyers and notices will be sent home to notify parents about workshops. The school year will begin with an open house where parents will have the opportunity to meet and greet the staff, Urban Health, the PTA and PC. Materials will be provided to support the home school connection. The school year will end with a similar event where parents will meet teachers on the following grade and receive material to provide student with summer support. Workshops are teacher and/or parent lead are supported by the IEP Teacher, Parent Coordinator, PTA and Sheltering Arms Afterschool Program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedules, per session, materials- OTPS, consultants. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 22, 2019, at least 50% of the students will demonstrate improvement in ELA and Math as evidenced by performance based assessments scored, state test simulations (ELA/Math), Fountas & Pinnell benchmark assessment and iReady assessment (ELA/Math). Assessment reports and data points, (ELA and MAth Mid-Year Benchmark) will be utilized by teams to modify teaching and learning. The student assessments and tasks will be analyzed during Monday PD, Tuesday planning and daily grade meetings to determine student progress toward meeting standards. Data will be compared to Fall 2018 assessments. At this time, necessary feedback from consultants, grade teams, instructional leadership and performance data will inform adjustments of curriculum. Data will be analyzed and learning objectives will be revised to supports students and sub-groups. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Specific instruments used to measure student progress are Performance Based Assessments (on-demand) , writing samples, unit assessments and completed student products. iReady (ELA/Math): daily lesson, end skill test and assessment (Sept/Jan-Feb/May) Fountas & Pinnell: assessment (Sept/JanFeb/May)  Benchmark Literacy: Reading Cycle Assessment - 3 weeks / Writing Assessment - 4-5 weeks    Math Modules: 2-5 weeks  NYS Simulations (ELA/Math): Fall (Oct. 2018) and Mid-Winter(Feb. 2019) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In order to achieve the goal of helping students become life-long learners, we have built into our instructional program partnerships with the City Year Group, 75 student council peer mentoring, student of the month acknowledgement, student of the year celebration, and monthly grade/class attendance celebrations. These partnerships and activities continue to enhance our school environment as well as student achievement through clubs, activities, and tutoring services. Additionally, our school focuses on the whole child by partnering with Urban Health, a full-service medical office on site, Dental Clinic, and Sheltering Arms after school program, World Vision and New York Pantry as indicated on the quality review report. Our report card grade for NYC schools is B. Strengths: ● Family worker dedicated to attendance ● City Year Volunteers (support attendance initiative and instruction-in class teacher support) ● Urban Health Medical-Dental Office on Site ● Attendance Teacher Weekly / Daily Officer Needs: ● Parent outreach through parent coordinator and school staff (translated information through flyers and school website)  Parent workshops on attendance, parent engagement, parent requested topics, materials to support home/school instruction, Saturday English classes, and health and safety topics ● Rewards and celebrations / monthly school social events and assemblies Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 21  By June 2019 there will be a 2% increase in whole school attendance rate as measured by the 2018-1019 RYMA attendance report, compared to 2017-2018 RYMA report. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activities and strategies: parents Sept 2018-June 2019 ● Outreach by family assistant and attendance teachers - through personal phone calls, phone systems and parent coordinator students ● Follow up by City Year volunteers through morning/afternoon Meet & Greet/Coffee @ Curb/Special Assemblies Attendance teachers, City Year group, administrator, family workers, teachers and after- school program  Create and develop and Equity Team. We will engage all teachers in defining and identifying inequalities that hinder student progress of specific subgroups by conducting professional development activities driven by the Equity Teams; by doing this teachers will develop an understanding of how beliefs, assumptions and actions have an effect in student learning.  Monthly celebration through school activities (parent/student trips, family day, family field day and school family celebrations/dances/events and certificates)  Annual Student of the Year Evening Celebration  Parent interest workshops - topics requested by the parents, homework helpers group, home-school instruction support, and health & safety. Urban Health and Dental facilities are on site in our school and provide full medical care and workshops. Use of designated funds to provide temporary housing students with book bags, materials and clothing needed to have full participation at school. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will hold regular workshops, provide parents with information on parent workshops in other locations (District Parent Office , NY Historical Society, etc). The PTA will hold monthly meetings and outreach to 2018-19 CEP 23  parents in the community. Newsletters, agendas, meeting notices and flyers will promote parent engagement. The school and after school program will work together to provide parents will family events such as Family Paint Night, Family Fitness Night, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  City Year, attendance teacher, administrators, guidance counselor, family worker, materials, and incentives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in whole school attendance rate, as measured by RYMA attendance report for the period of September 2018 to February 2019, compared to the RYMA attendance report for the period of September 2017 to February 2018. The students in our at-risk list will show improved attendance as evidenced by Automate the Schools Reports that will be analyzed to determine students who are at risk of not meeting attendance regulations. A list of students who are at less than 90% attendance rate by February 4th will be compiled in order to have the attendance team conduct outreach and support. The team will include the attendance teachers, family worker, parent coordinator and other school staff. Celebrations of attendance will include daily attendance and improved absences and lateness. Students and parents will receive acknowledgement through certificates, invited on special trips and a family dinner celebration. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Specific instrument to be used to measure student attendance progress is the RYMA attendance report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● Teacher Collaborations ● Curriculum Planning and implementation aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards ● Use of Technology ● Professional Development Opportunities ● Planning for Instruction Needs: ● Consultants to provide additional PD based on specific areas ● Additional support for second grade students to meet the “gap” ● Content based PD such as NY Historical Society, Wilson Fundations, Generation Ready Balanced Literacy and Writing Workshop, National Training Network Services (Math) / Materials to supplement curriculum for special populations Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teacher teams will have at least 2 inter-visitation cycles utilizing protocols to analyze student work , identify problems of practice, create and action plan and evaluate next steps trough the use of the Peer Collaborative Inter-Visitation model. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development provided by Consultants and Teacher Leaders during Mondays and Tuesdays extended work time (K-5). Teachers December 2018 - June 2019 ● Teachers ● Consultants ● Administrators Develop people:  3 dedicated peer collaborative teachers to provide coaching and support new and and established staff.  Establish 2 model classrooms in order to implement an  inter-visitation schedule. Inter-visitation plan with protocols to be drafted by December of 2018.  Peer Collaborating Teachers will work with grade bands (K-1, 2-3, and 4-5) in presenting and leading professional development. December: Protocol and model classrooms established January-June - full cycle of inter-visitations K-5 grade teams will engage in the discussion of best practices observed and plan how to include these in their daily practice. Teams of teachers will meet weekly to engage in: Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019  Teachers  Grade Leaders  Administrators  inquiry study of student work generated by these practices  determine next steps to determine trends as shown in   various data points adjust curriculum and pacing in the areas of ELA and math to address students areas of need as evidenced by progress monitoring. level 1 students in ELA and math will receive additional supports as determined by the RTI team During Monday extended time Professional Development on the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) model for our ENL population and Differentiated instruction professional development for our IEP population (grades K-5) Teachers Sept 2018 -June 2019  Teachers 2018-19 CEP 26 School Leadership Team meetings (monthly) Sept 2018 -June 2019  SLT Team Parents Teachers, Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will work with the after school program, the PC, and the PTA to survey parents and provide workshops on parent/community interests. Through presenters provided by the PC to conduct workshops, Parent University Teacher-Lead workshops, Pre-K workshops and PTA meetings the parents will receive various materials and have opportunities to participate in family friendly events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Schedules, per session, materials-OTPS, consultants Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019 - 100% of our teacher teams will meet during the designed professional development time (Mondays) to evaluate the student performance based assessments determine student progress (at least 50%) toward meeting standards. This plan is put into action through an ABC Cycle: A = Data - Teacher teams meet to look at student achievement across grades / gaps & notices / CCLS B = Student Work - Looking a student work to progress monitor / check for understanding C= Adjustment - Make necessary scaffolds and differentiation to access standards Teams are made up of an administrator that supports a specific grade, classroom teachers on the grade, speciality teachers and out of classroom staff that work on the grade(s). Consultants are interactive in meetings when on site. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 27  Specific instruments used to measure student progress are iReady, Fountas & Pinnell Running Records, Pathways rubrics, checklists and performance based assessments given on demand during the course of each unit. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Student performance in English Language Arts state assessments continues to be a focus of improvement. Our state data indicates that our student performance improved by 2% last year (2017-2018). This is a 1% increase from the prior school year (2016-2017) Professional development opportunities are necessary for academic achievement and social-emotional growth. Consultants provide demonstrations and introduce protocols that are put into practice. We will improve conversations across all subject areas to support literacy as a focus. Students will be articulating their thinking and justifying their answers using text evidence. Our priority will be to strengthen our Literacy instruction in order to support student growth. We will utilize Balance Literacy models (Reading and Writing workshops) as the vehicle for literacy instruction. Through carefully planning with consultants literacy planning will continue to be the focus of instruction. Professional development will be planned in five cycles of focus in order to maintain teacher engagement within the teams structure. Strengths: ● Teacher Collaborations ● Curriculum Planning and implementation aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards ● Use of Technology ● Professional Development Opportunities ● Planning for Instruction Needs: ● Consultants to provide additional PD based on specific areas ● Additional support for second grade students to meet the “gap” ● Content based PD such as NY Historical Society, Fundations Phonics, Generation Ready Balanced Literacy, National Training Network Services (Math) / Materials to supplement curriculum for special populations 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will demonstrate effective practices in designing coherent instruction (1E Danielson) and assessment during instruction (3D) in Advance. Grade team members will collaboratively analyze student assessment data and performance tasks to improve students' mastery of literacy and mathematics. There will be an increase of MOTP and MOSL scores as a result of timely meaningful and actionable feedback and coaching. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will collaborate with teacher leaders to create and implement a PD plan that builds teachers’ capacity to implement strategies presented during professional development provided at the school or via outside providers. Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 *Teachers *RTI Team Students *Administrators Administrators, coaches and mentors will conduct teacher engagement through PDs, conduct class visits to assess student engagement using Danielson, mentor tools, social-emotional practices and rubrics. We expect to see 80% of consistency of teaching practices and engagement in the classrooms. Provide at-risk services for children that require additional support -Special Education Teacher / ENL Teacher will create groups for students that require intervention requested from the classroom teacher and/or parent -2nd and 3rd grade groups will meet the needs of high functioning 2nd graders and 3rd grades just below grade level -4th and 5th grade groups will meet the needs of high functioning 4th graders and 5th grades just below grade level Utilize CCLS in the development of student tasks and learning activities that scaffold instruction and provided differentiation to include various learning styles. Teachers and students Sept 2018-June 2019  Teachers  Consultants  Administrators By June 2019, 100% percent K-5 will incorporate the RULER social-emotional learning by introducing mood meter and protocols for engaging students in conversations about emotional development.  School leaders will collaborate will instructional cabinet to develop and a implement school-wide professional Teachers and students Sept 2018- June 2019  Teachers  Teacher Leaders  Counselors  Consultants  Administrators 2018-19 CEP 31 development plan that is differentiated, targeted, and data-based in order to improve student work products.  Peer Collaborative Teachers and mentor teachers will support the growth and development of new and un-tenured teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will work with the after school program, the PC, and the PTA to survey parents and provide workshops on parent/community interests. Through presenters provided by the PC to conduct workshops, Parent University Teacher-Lead workshops, PreK workshops and PTA meetings the parents will receive various materials and have opportunities to participate in family friendly events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Generation Ready ELA consultants, National Training Network (NTN) math consultants, preparation periods aligned to grades to support teacher teams, teacher-lead parent workshops, English as a New Language (ENL) Saturday classes, and consultants to provide student with theater, music and movement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February of 2019- 50% of teachers will articulate their implementation of professional development strategies and initiatives presented during professional development sessions. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of teachers receiving overall Effective MOTP ratings in component component 4E, as measured by the 2018-2019 Advance overall MOTP ratings, compared to the number of teachers receiving Effective MOTP ratings in component component 4E, as measured by the 2017-2018 Advance overall MOTP ratings. Administrators will meet with teachers for a mid-year conferences to determine progress toward improvement of Danielson component on student engagement as evidence in classroom observations formal and informal. Use of Advance reports and observations will be utilized to guide the professional conversation. 2018-19 CEP 32  Update February 2019- Administrators have met with teachers during 3rd cycle of observations and are on track to meet this goal. Mentors and coaches will meet weekly with teacher teams and/or individually to discuss best practices and student engagement. A Professional development plan has been updated to meet additional teachers' needs. We are on track to meet this goal and will expect to see a 20% increase in student engagement and coherence of this practice across classrooms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Specific instruments used to measure student progress classroom observation reports and Advance generated reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In an effort to further support family engagement and parent voice within our school community we will continue to work with and meet with the parent coordinator, PTA, Sheltering Arms after school program, and the student council to survey the needs and wants of the community. We will plan family trips, have school social events (encourage attendance, parent appreciation, student social celebrations). We will support events throughout the school year on school and non-school days (Thanksgiving Dinner /Community Health Fair). Also the parents will be provided with opportunities to attend events outside of the school supported by the parent coordinator (Family Field Trip, Healthy cooking workshops and parent meeting in the District). As a result of our NYS Quality Review , PS 75 was rated well developed in these areas. Strengths: ● Parent coordinator's office provides workshops ● Community Based Organization provides services to students on site ● Outreach from teachers Needs: ● Additional community based organizations and guidance support for students with temporary housing ● Community leaders to become more involved in our school ● Parent attendance to increase school workshops Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 20% increase of parent participation during parent teacher conferences as compared to 2017 levels as evidenced by event attendance and sign in sheets. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Meetings with parents during parent teacher conferences, Tuesday designated parent communication time, Super Tuesdays parent workshops and open school nights Provide family literacy classes to parents of ENL students Parents Sept 2018-June 2019  Teachers  Administrators  Parent Coordinator Ongoing workshops on academic expectations, family involvement in reinforcing skills and homework help among other topics will be offered. Self advocacy and self help workshops will be offered. Partnerships with community organizations such as Urban Health, Sheltering Arms, Department of Health and Hunts Point Market will strengthen our community work. Parent attendance to celebrations, performances, student of the year dinner and monthly incentives Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 ● Teachers ● Administrators Parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. None at this time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, Administrators, Incentives, Certificates, Incentives and invitations to attend special events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 35  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019- 50% of our parents surveyed will rate our school as meeting or exceeding their expectations. Midyear we will survey parents to determine if they are satisfied with the school and climate in the school. The survey will provide stakeholders an opportunity to request additional services. We will look at these results and research organizations that can provide those additional supports to our school. We will continue to work with World Vision, Urban Health, City Year and Sheltering Arms Family Services. We will participate the HEART project and the community garden. During this time the School Leadership team can discuss what programs and extra curricula programs have been beneficial to the overall achievement of as students. This 2018-2019 school survey will be distrubuted in the school auditorium and parents will receive report cards upon completion to increase the number of surveys completed. Technology lab will also be used to support multi-language parents/guardians. Update February 2018- Meet with SLT parent members and parent coordinator for feedback from parents indicates that we are on track to meet the goal. We work on parent communication through phone systems, flyers and feedback through surveys. By June 2018, we expect to have 70% of our parent/student feedback on extra curricula programs and make adjustments as necessary for the September 2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Specific instruments used to measure student progress are i-Ready diagnostic (individualized instruction) administered three times a year in Sept., Jan/Feb, and May, Fountas and Pinnell benchmark(s) is administered three times a year in Sept., Jan/Feb, and May, NYS ELA and Math simulations (Jan/Feb.,) and MOSL based tasks and student inquiry (Sept. and May). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1, level 2 or teacher recommendation based on class performance Level 1, level 2 or teacher recommendation based on class performance Level 1, level 2 or teacher recommendation based on class performance Level 1, level 2 or teacher recommendation based on class performance Teacher and SIT recommendation Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided reading, phonics, guided writing, repeated reading, skills and strategy focused instruction , tiered vocabulary Computational fluency, skill/strategy focused instruction, guided math, word problem strategies Guided practice, focused vocabulary instruction, content focused instruction Guided practice, focused vocabulary instruction, content focused instruction At risk counseling provided by school counselor and social worker to address social-emotional concerns that are affecting the students’ ability to function in school Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) One-to-one, small group, tutoring During school and after school One-to-one, small group, tutoring During school and after school One-to-one, small group, tutoring During school and after school One-to-one, small group, tutoring During school and after school One-to-one, small group, tutoring During school 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently 135 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our school has various resources in place to support students in temporary housing. This year school funds will be allocated to include an additional school counselor. Students are also supported with school supplies and school bags, clothing and invitations to attend academic programs provided by the school during recess periods and extended time on task. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. A hiring committee will be established to ensure all new hired teachers are highly qualified. ● Additional professional development hours are being provided to teachers for re-certification purposes and assigned mentors to new teachers / teachers in need of additional support. ● Supervisors attend citywide hiring fairs. ● 5% Title I set aside is used to help teachers become HQ. ● School works with the District Human Resources Director to ensure that all non-highly qualified teachers meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  District level and consultant pd on alignment to standards which include scaffold instruction and differentiated activities  Use of external trainer to monitor the implementation of ELA/Math curriculum and provide feedback and demonstrations  Ongoing staff development to provide job embedded opportunities for ELA/Math, inclusive of SWDs and  ENLs. Opportunities include support for classroom management and mentoring. Teachers turnkey and access data to modify instruction Staff team groups to meet weekly in a series of PD and other professional activities related to the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards: ABC (3Week/Repeat Cycle) Data, Looking at Student Work, Adjustments planning to scaffold and differentiate during Mondays and Tuesdays extended work time.  Parent workshops on topics related to Common Core Learning Standards and social emotional / health concerns  Teachers College(TC) Reading and Writing Training (District 8) Select Teachers and Administration  PD Now-The Master Teacher On-line social emotional and academic courses for paraprofessionals 2018-19 CEP 40   RULER Yale Emotional Intelligence (District 8)Training for administration, paraprofessionals, teachers, counselors, cafeteria and office staff, whole school training Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We conduct a parent orientation meeting during the month of May led by the EC Social Worker assigned. In June, teachers create a “Day in Kindergarten” schedule. Each Pre-K class is matched with a Kindergarten teacher. Pre-K students spend the day as kindergarten students. We provide Pre-K families with “What to Expect Your Child to Learn in K” pamphlet from the DOE parent resources. Pre-K schedule contains several components and assessments used in K curriculum. Pre-K teachers meet with Kindergarten teachers during the month of June to share records, assessments and any other pertinent information. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Collaboration between representatives from all grades and administration in the selection of baseline, mid-year and end of the year assessments. A Committee comprised of teachers and administrators worked from July to September 2018 on the selection of MOSL assessments for the purposes of Advance (Teacher Evaluation). In addition, we will conduct a material review in June. Teachers are invited to preview materials being considered for next year and provide their input. Teacher teams are encouraged to suggest specific assessments for each grade. Test simulations are selected in collaboration with teachers from 2 nd -5 th grades. For new material a consultant is hired to provide professional development in June and during September orientation. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 CEP 41  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 4 and 5 Section 4 and 5 Section 4 and 5 Section 4 and 5 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 558,508.00 185,323.00 12,366.00 0 3,502,679.00 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 2018-19 CEP 42  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 75, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. PS 75 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 75, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 46  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Public School 75 is a Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5 School located in the Hunts Points section of the South Bronx, a low socio-economic area. It is a school serving 630 students including Special Education students in grades K-5. The school climate is warm and inviting, catering to the aesthetic needs of early childhood students. The halls are brightly decorated and classrooms are rich in print and focus on children’s literature and content area instructional materials. There is an atmosphere of teamwork and mutual respect between staff members and students, making it a place where students are safe and happy. P. S. 75 proposes the implementation of an after school program for ENL students at the entering, emerging and transitioning levels of language proficiency. The goal of this program is to provide additional support with ENL, Reading and Writing. This program will also strengthen basic literacy skills in the native language. The after school program will serve approximately 25 ENL students in grades 3 - 4. The primary language of instruction will be English. The program will run for 26 weeks (51 sessions). The program will begin in October 9, 2018 for 2 hours, two days a week (Wednesday and Thursday) from 2:45pm to 4:45pm. The program will end in May 15, 2019. The program will employ one ENL/Writing teacher and one supervisor because there is not other after school program running at the school. The program supervisor will work two days a week (Wednesday and Thursday) from 2:50pm to 4:50pm. (Supervisor's regular day working hours are 7am to 2:45pm). The supervisor will oversee the after school program and assume responsibility of it. Supervisor will develop a regular schedule for teacher observation and maintain an accurate record of observations. In addition, supervisor will do classroom walkthroughs to observe teacher monitoring and checking student understanding during instruction and, ensure instruction is rigorous and engaging at all times. Among the instructional materials that will enhance our ENL program, we expect to purchase, Focus Forward by Rigby. This intensive intervention program has been developed based on scientific research in reading and writing and has been used in a standards based curriculum. The program is aligned with Common Core State Standards and will provide opportunities to enhance and differentiate the ENL program. It augments the ENL and can support a balanced literacy program. The Title III funds will help a staff and students develop greater self-confidence as they enhance their skills in ENL reading and writing. Staff would use fundamental Bilingual strategies and methodologies to assure students build on their strength as they strive to meet and surpass standards set by the City and State. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: PS 75 proposes a professional development plan, which includes pedagogical staff who works directly with ENL students. This staff includes ENL/Bilingual teachers, cluster teachers, Title I staff and support staff that impact on the quality of student performance. All interested staff will be provided the opportunity to become familiar with the elements of ESL and express interest in participating in the program. An informal survey of our teachers this spring and our professional development survey indicated that teachers are interested in learning more about ESL strategies and how to implement these types of strategies in their classrooms. The school administrators and staff developers will also support teachers in their instructional practice and help with team building and creating an environment that supports this initiative. PS 75 will provide professional development specifically to support the teaching, planning and learning process for ENL students. We view professional development as a dynamic process of learning that leads to a new level of understanding and heightened awareness of the context in which teachers work that may compel them to examine accepted policies and routines. To complete the cycle, we will provide teachers with opportunities to reflect on these learning endeavors and teaching experiences with the intent of refining and extending our thinking and learning in education. Teachers will participate in weekly professional development activities to support the implementation of instructional programs for ENL students. In addition, ENL teachers will participate in five curriculum-planning sessions that are geared to increase ENL student achievement. These planning sessions will begin on January 8, 2019, for thirty-five minutes, one day a week (Tuedays). These planning sessions will end on February 5, 2019. School Staff Developers and ENL specialist will conduct these planning sessions. MONTH TENTATIVE TOPICS Jan. 8th Looking at Students' Work to Examine Student Thinking Jan. 15th Examine the NYS Next Generation Standards to Identify Areas of Alignment and to surface gaps Jan. 22nd Discuss the Implications for Teacher Planning Preparation Jan. 29th Strengthening Student Work and Teacher Practice Feb. 5th Analyze and Discuss Case Study: Identify Strong Practices Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration 2018-19 CEP 52  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities topics to be covered   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: The program supervisor and school parent coordinator will coordinate the Art parental component of the program. PS 75 proposes the implementation of an Art workshop for parents. The goals of the art workshop will be: a) to offer parents an artistic experience through poetry and illustrations while learning the English language; b) the development and enhancement of systematic use of parents' cultural background and native languages in planning and adapting instructional objectives or activities through the use of ESL strategies and methodologies; c) the use of community resources cross cultural awareness and understanding; d) the opportunity for parents to apply and enhance their artistic skills and increase cultural awareness. The parent Art workshop will serve approximately 20 - 25 ENL parents. During the month of January, we will schedule one Art workshop for parents. The workshop will have a duration of two hours. We will employ one licensed and qualified artist to implement the instructional program. The school parent coordinator will send home bilingual letters and flyers home to inform parents about the Art workshop and will follow up with bilingual phone calls. In addition, the parent coordinator will monitor attendance and provide incentives for active participation in the Art workshops. There will be a final display of original student art illustrations in a variety of forms, styles and approaches. Month Topic Art Consultant January Create and Design Posters Ana Soto and Multicultural Books Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2018-19 CEP 53 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 54  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name School of Research & Discovery Borough Bronx School Number 75 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marines Arrieta-Cruz Coach Laura Paguada-Mellado ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maria Acosta Teacher/Subject Area Thera Erickson / K-2 Teacher/Subject Area Ana Made / K Related-Service Provider Laura Bertolotti Superintendent Dr. Karen Ames Assistant Principal Yokasta Pena Coach Claribel Morales School Counselor Winnie Crespo Parent Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 4 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 652 2018-19 CEP 55 Total number of ELLs 121 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.56%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools we use are the Fountas and Pinnell, NYSITELL, MOSL, ENL Benchmark and Core Knowledge Language Language Art (CKLA) literacy skill strand assessment. F & P and the CKLA literacy assessments provides teacher with valuable data on students' reading comprehension, decoding, phonological awareness and levels of fluency. The NYSITELL provides data on student's level of English acquisition, MOSL determines the amount of growth each student has in writing and reading. The analysis and triangulation of these various quantitative data helps to inform the school's instructional plan and provide insights on required Tier 2 interventions, if needed. The constant monitoring of this data helps the school to reflect and revise targeted instructional intervention plans. After reviewing the data from the various assessments, we have come to the conclusion that our students need additional support in their writing development, for example, organizing their ideas, using relevant details, and developing more complex sentences. Some of our students are able to articulate clearly in English, however, we will continue to frontload and develop their academic vocabulary and monitor their progress. 2018-19 CEP 56  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All teachers are given an assessment calendar, customized to their grade-level. The calendar has due dates for the various assessments given throughout the year. Teachers adhere to the dates and assess their students. Newcomer ENLs and ENLs with IEPs are granted their testing modifications and/or regulations (i.e. exempted from ELA if child came less that a year to the NYC public school system). Once the assessments are given, teachers meet as a grade to discuss student progress, adjust lesson plans and/or units to meet the needs of the students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At interim points throughout the year, the ENL vertical professional learning team analyzes ENL periodic and formative assessments to progress monitor the efficacy of program implementation and student language development. The teams also analyzes student writing on summative writing performance tasks to determine if strategies implemented are having a value-added impact on student outcomes. In the beginning of the year, ENL teachers use the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL scores as a baseline or the four modalities in English proficiency. Based on the data, the areas of need are in reading and writing. Our students need additional support in vocabulary development, making inferences, finding the main idea or theme, and supporting details. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, the ELL vertical professional team meets to analyze and discuss the implications of the programs in place and its impact on student outcomes. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Within the RtI framework, data is always used to drive instruction. At Tier 1, teachers use formative data to make revisions to lessons and units. At Tier 2, students who have been screened in need of targeted instruction are provided with Wilson intervention. We also use the RIGOR program and start up/build up to build foundational literacy skills. At Tier 3, specialized assessments are used to identify possible learning disabilities before recommendation to special education services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data for students who scored at an entering level on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT (2017) in lower grades revealed a steady progress in phonological awareness and language acquisition. Some students increased by a level or two while some scored at a commanding level (proficiency level). However, the majority of students in the lower grades who scored at an Expanding level either stayed on the same level or digressed to a transitioning or emerging level. The data for the students in the upper grade levels revealed that language learners are struggling with making meaning of texts and using literary strategies for literal analysis and evaluation. They also need further academic language exposure and idiomatic language. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ELL vertical professional team biweekly meets with teachers of ENLs to reflect on how to enhance teacher's practices and to analyze and discuss the implications of the programs in place and its impact on student outcomes. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2018-19 CEP 57  a. Freestanding ENL program. Students will be grouped by grade and heterogeneously by language proficiency level. Students who scored on the entering level through transitioning level will be grouped in one class and an ENL teacher will work with a common branch teacher to ensure that students receive their mandated minutes of instruction and support. Students who scored on the expanding and commanding levels on the NYSESLAT will also be grouped together and supported by an ENL teacher with a common branch teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable, TBE program is not offered at the school. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable, Dual Language programs is not offered at the school. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? To ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is delivered in the ENL program model we provide a combination of integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction provided by a certified ENL pedagogue. Entering and Emerging ENLs will be grouped heterogeneously to receive stand alone instructional services from a dual certified Common Branch/ENL teacher. Students at the transitioning and expanding levels will receive instructional minutes through an integrated model provided by Common Branch and ENL teachers using an instructional program aligned to the scope and sequence of science and social studies. In the upper grades, commanding ENLs will receive instructional minutes through an integrated model focused on content and building disciplinary knowledge and literacy skills. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We use the Sheltered Instructional Observational Protocol to ensure that all content is delivered and comprehensible to all language learners. The SIOP model provides an instructional framework to support teachers in planning coherent lessons with a language focus while making content accessible to students. Teachers use content and language objectives and make them explicit to students. In addition to posting clear content and language learning targets, teachers tap into students' background knowledge and introduce a variety of grade-appropriate strategies to support students in acquiring new content knowledge and academic language. Teachers scaffold academic discussions through front-loading vocabulary using visuals and Total Physical Response, sentence starters and frames. Two SIOP strategies are taught and practiced per week to support students with access to complex text used in the literacy and content curricula. To monitor language acquisition, teachers use a variety of formative assessment tools such as the Capellini checklist to note language patterns used by students along with the ENL periodic assessments monthly to track language development and to inform lesson planning and provide targeted interventions, as needed. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that Spanish-speaking ENLs are appropriately assessed with the Spanish LAB. Home language support is always provided via bilingual content glossaries and dictionaries. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing 2018-19 CEP 58  d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE- Small group guided and targeted instruction is provided to SIFE students to help fill in gaps in learning. In grades K-5. SIFE students work at learning stations with a language buddy or teacher on learning activities focused on building early grade literacy and math skills. In grades 3-5, a school counselor provides socio-emotional and academic services to SIFE students. SIFE students also participate in peer tutoring and are partnered with students who speak the same home language. Furthermore, the schools offers an afters-school ENL program.b. Newcomer ENLs in grades K through 5 are provided with pull-out instructional support services using the National Geographic: Inside the U.S.A. Additionally, Newcomer ENLs in grades K through 2 are provided with pull-out instructional support services using the phonics programs to build phonemic awareness skills. c. Developing ENLs are provided integrated instruction using the RIGOR program to supplement the core curriculum and improve academic vocabulary while building content knowledge. d. Long Term ENLs are provided with integrated instruction by both an ENL teacher and a common branch teacher using the Rigor program to supplement the core curriculum and improve academic vocabulary. In addition, long term ENLs are provided with small group instruction and invited to the ELLA program and the after-school program.e. Former ENLs are provided with integrated ENL instruction for 90 minutes per week. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies and grade-level materials teacher of ENL-SWD uses universal design for learning (UDL), explicit teaching techniques, SIOP model, high-low interest level reading books, and small guided instruction for all content areas. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. Through small group instruction, integrated teaching within the classroom and ENL teachers, we provides ELL/SWDS with instruction in least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. For our newcomer ELL subgroup, we use the Our Way to English and Focus Forward programs to support students to make meaning of non-fiction complex text. In the upper grade, we use variety of intervention strategies to provide additional support in building student phonological awareness and fluency. In the lower grades, we use the Word Sampling System and the Core Knowledge skill strand formative assessment tools to monitor acquisition of early literacy skills. Additional support is provided to students in small, guided groups using Learning A-Z. Teachers use teacher-created intervention materials in addition to supplemental resources from the core curriculum. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? To improve the ELL program, we anticipate using a variety of program and interventions to supplement the core curriculum. The programs are aligned to the themes in the core curriculum to provide additional support, exposure and practice of academic language. We have also supplemented the independent, shared and guided reading program with culturally responsive trade. Additional newcomer support will be provided to students in the upper grades through the INSIDE the USA program. P.S. 75X has a full time ENL teacher/coordinator to support ELL instruction and monitor ELL compliance. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The Spalding reading intervention system is being replaced with the CORE knowledge skill strand to support teacher in progress monitoring the development of early literacy skills. This will facilitate the inquiry work of collaborative teacher teams to make informed adjustment to the core curriculum and embed multiple entry point to ensure access. Additionally, The READ program has also been discontinued and replaced with the ELLA program to provide additional support to ENLs after-school. 2018-19 CEP 59  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At P.S. 75x all required support services, materials and resources corresponds to the ENLs ages and grade levels. In each classroom there are leveled, culturally relevant books to meet the needs of the students (Entering - Commanding). We also provide students, especially new admits, with a desktop dictionary in their native language for clarification during the lessons. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We will begin using the Benchmark Reading and Writing programs, following the workshop model, to provide supplemental instructional support and ensure that teachers are implementing the program with fidelity. We also use the Math in Focus program which requires the use of technology to enhance math content instruction. To further enhance instruction, teachers across grade-levels use SMART board technology to provide engaging and visual support to content area learning. We also use Read 180 which requires the use of technology to enhance and to build background knowledge. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is always provided in the ENL program, through the use of bilingual glossaries and dictionaries, books in the home language, novels and when possible, oral translation by either a "buddy" student or the teacher. Teachers also use cognates in the content areas to value the home language as an asset for instruction. Translanguaging techniques are also embedded in daily lessons to bridge student learning. Math in Focus is also available in the home language in addition to translated resources from ThinkCentral and Engage NY. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL coordinator works closely with the support service providers to ensure that ELL students receive appropriate and research-based instructional services and interventions. In the Early grades, P.S. 75X focuses on supporting ELLs in early literacy schools through the use of technology programs such as Read 180. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We will begin using the Benchmark Reading and Writing programs, following the workshop model, to provide supplemental instructional support and ensure that teachers are implementing the program with fidelity. We also use the Math in Focus program which requires the use of technology to enhance math content instruction. To further enhance instruction, teacher across grade-levels use SMART board technology to provide engaging and visual support to content area learning. We also use Read 180 which requires the use of technology to enhance and to build background knowledge. In addition, P.S. 75 shares the building with a District 75 school, P.S. 352. Some students are mainstreamed into the classes (either ENL self-contained or general education) for part of the day. The teachers collaborate and share resources and materials utilized to better meet the needs of all the learners. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, newly enrolled Kindergarten ENLs are invited to a Welcome to Kindergarten meeting facilitated by our kindergarten teachers. The students will be invited to come in and meet the staff and take the NYSITELL if necessary while the parents attend the parent choice meeting. If a new ENL enrolls in the middle of the school year, the ENL Coordinator will come down to meet the child and the parents to assess the initial language needs of the student. The child will be temporarily placed in a classroom and will take the NYSITELL. Once the results are determined, the parents will attend a parent choice meeting and the child will be placed in a classroom according to the parents preference. Newcomers will be serviced through an integrated model and receive stand alone ENL instruction. 2018-19 CEP 60  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, PS 75X does not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At P.S. 75x, we provide all ENL, monolingual, and support staff such as: paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, speech teachers, secretaries, and parent coordinator with ongoing opportunities to attend both on-site and off-site workshops which reflect current theory based learning practices used for ENL instruction. Providing teachers with effective learning opportunities is the key to increasing student performance. As a result of these workshops, teachers have adopted many of the learning models that support achievement for our ENL population. They are encouraged to work collaboratively in professional learning teams to revise lessons and units of study. Grade conferences, Vertical and Horizontal meetings keep staff members abreast of ongoing changes in the Language Allocation Policy document. These workshops are provided by our principal, assistant principal, team leaders, ELA and MATH staff developers, coaches, ELL specialists, and Literacy Support consultants. Some topics that will be addresses are: Overview of the ENL Program , LAP document, Use of Assessments for ENLs, Data Driven Instruction (NYSESLAT), Writer's Workshop, NYSESLAT and NYISTELL, Common Core State Standards. In addition, during our Title III program, we offer workshops to parents. Some topics could be, but are not limited to Testing Accommodations for ENLs, How to Help Your Child be Successful on State tests, and Identifying your child as an ELL and placing your student into a program of your choice. Professional Development is provided to all staff keeping them abreast of changes CR-PART 154 state regulations for the ENLs. During the month of June, teachers and administrators meet to discuss the incoming students and how they can collaborate to ease the children's transition from one grade to another. They meet to discuss placement, special needs and status of any evaluation that is pending. Teachers will also have the opportunity to attend workshops such as: Q-Tel, NYSABE, professional learning opportunities offered by DELLSS, the new Borough Field Support Center and through the Fordham R-BERN. All teachers attending workshops will keep an ongoing log of the hours, certificates of attendance, professional development summaries are responsible to turn-key the information/resources shared during weekly meetings with their professional learning teams. Teachers of ENLs participate in all on-site trainings focused on the implementation of the Benchmark Reading, Benchmark Writing, and Math in Focus, which is the core curriculum implemented at the school. The core curriculum focuses on the implementation of the common core shifts. In addition, teachers participate in off-site professional development offered through the Middle School Quality Initiative and Fordham R-BERN. MSQI and Fordham RBERN provide additional training on how to provide access to the Common Core Learning Standards for diverse learners. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To support ENLs as they transition from elementary to middle school, a majority of Former ENL students are departmental for math, ELA, and science so they learn how to handle to responsibilities of learning from multiple teachers. Fifth grade teachers 2018-19 CEP 61  support the holistic needs of students to prepare them for transition into middle school. The ENL Coordinator will work with the math and literacy coach to provide quality professional development to ENL teachers Professional learning opportunities offered by DELLSS and the Fordham RBERN . Certificates of participation and copies of the professional learning agendas are stored in a central location for easy access and audit purposes. Teachers who participate in off-site professional development are required to turn-key information to their colleagues during professional development Mondays and Tuesday as provisioned by the UFT contract. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides frequent individual meetings during Family Engagement time (Tuesday afternoons and/or during Prep periods) with parents of ENLs to keep them informed of the goals of the program, results on language proficiency assessments and to discuss language development needs of each child. Throughout the day, teachers are constantly assessing students through formative assessments, summative assessments, checklists (i.e. the Cappellini Language Checklist, Pathways Writing Checklist), observations, and conferences (during literacy, math, and the content areas). Teachers meet with parents to discuss the child's English proficiency progress and and their goals. Furthermore, parent letters are distributed in their home languages in the beginning of the year notifying parents of their child's NYSITELL/NYSESLAT results. Teachers are given funds to provide translation services of all documents that go home with the students. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 1. The Parent Coordinator and ENL Coordinator of P.S. 75x provide on going workshops for ELL parents to attend. Workshop topics include Parent Orientation for ENLs, Test Taking Strategies, Eating Disorders, and Community Involvement. During all the events, translators are available to assist parents of ENLs with any language challenges. Letters are sent home to parents informing them of the availability of translators during the parent teacher conferences and monthly workshops given at P.S. 75x. 2. Lincoln Hospital and the Bronx Lebanon Hospital provide counseling to ENL students and their parents, if needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Implications for InstructionThe implications for Language Allocation Policy and instruction at P.S. 75 are for students to be encouraged to speak through task-oriented situations in order to interact and communicate with peers and adults. Listening activities (note-taking, following spoken instruction), flexible groupings, instructional features (theme studies, scaffolding, language sensitive lessons modifications), multidimensional assessments (formal, informal, portfolios, running records, anecdotal observations) and other sources such as videos and audios (book on tape) will continue to be utilized. Reading and writing strategies for developing and improving English proficiency levels include guided, shared, and independent reading and writing (small groups, peer grouping, student-teachers conferencing) in order to develop and enhance language proficiency. In addition, the implications for instruction will involve continued staff development for teachers of ENLs in the use of ESL scaffolding strategies to teach content area materials, the use of oral and written language, the use of disciplinary discourse with students, push-in and pull-out support and extended day program for extra help. Teachers will expect students to achieve at high performance levels and use a variety of instructional strategies to challenge them. Students will be engaged in projects that enhance and ensure creativity and critical thinking. They will take responsibility for student success by employing methods to meet the needs of students. P.S. 75 teachers will be facilitators of students’ academic and personal growth, guiding them to be independent thinkers. Also, they will encourage students to take ownership of their own learning as evidence by creative student work, rigorous lesson planning and student interactions. To ensure meeting the needs of our ENL population, we will continue providing them the following services: 2018-19 CEP 62  Academic Intervention Services, Extended Day, Differentiated Instruction, Push-in Model of Instruction, Pull-out Model, Tutoring, Out of Classroom Writing Workshop, After School Instruction, and Saturday Instruction. 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Marines Arrieta-cruz, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School of Research & Discovery School DBN: 08X075 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marines Arrieta-Cruz Title Principal Yokasta Pena Assistant Principal Johana Cuevas Parent Coordinator Maria Acosta ENL/Bilingual Teacher Irma Richardson Parent Thera Erickson/ K-2 Teacher/Subject Area Ana Made / K Teacher/Subject Area Laura Paguada-Mellado Claribel Morales Coach Coach Winnie Crespo School Counselor Dr. Karen Ames Kristy DeLaCruz N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member CFN5 Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/7/17 9/9/17 9/917 9/9/17 9/917 9/9/17 9/9/17 9/9/17 9/9/17 9/9/17 9/9/17 9/917 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X075 School Name: PS School of Research & Discovery Superintendent: Dr. Karen Ames The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yokasta Pena Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents of all incoming students are asked to complete the New York City Department of Education “Parent / Guardian Home Language Identification Survey” and Student Emergency Contact cards. Using the information gathered from the language survey and parent interviews, the school determines individual written translation and oral interpretation needs to ensure that all family members of the school community are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language that they can understand. There is a bilingual (Spanish) Parent Coordinator at P.S. 75 who provides translation support, as necessary, for students and parents. The school Assistant Principal, Language Access Coordinator, ENL Coordinator/Teacher, and Guidance Counselor also provides translation support (Spanish) to families throughout the school year. In addition, there are several school staff members who help to facilitate communication with parents and family members who require translation or clarification. The major findings of the needs of parents within the PS 75 community with regard to the school's written translation and oral interpretation is that a majority of parents feel that our English/Spanish translations of 2018-19 CEP 66  newsletters, parent-teacher letters and parent reports provide appropriate opportunity for parents to keep informed about school curriculum, instruction, assessment and special programs. In addition, we are willing to provide translations in other languages, if needed in the future. The school has several staff members who join conferences, meetings and orientation programs to ensure that all parents and visitors can understand and participate. For example, during the school K-5 Open Houses held at PS 75 in the month of September, the Assistant Principal, Language Access Coordinator, ENL teacher, Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator served as a guide for parents and were available to answer questions. Parent feedback, as per the Learning Environment Survey, each year indicate that parents are highly satisfied with all aspects of their child's educational program and feel that the school communicates frequently with them. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic N/A 481 286 13 N/A 61.04 36.29 1.65 N/A 483 286 8 N/A 61.37 36.34 1.02 N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Arabic Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Newsletters Sept - June We use the following: -School-based personnel Parent-teacher letters Sept/Nov/Mar -Translation and Interpretation Unit Parent reports -The existing DOE templates form the Translation and Interpretation Intranet page 2018-19 CEP 67  Letters from the school Administration Open School Night letters Super Tuesday letter/flyers Spring Fling letters/flyers Calendars Homework packages Parent-teacher conference announcements After-school program information Saturday program information Sept - June Sept - June Sept/March Sept - June Jan - May Sept - June -Translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed We use the following: -School-based personnel Dec/Feb/Mar -Translation and Interpretation Unit -The existing DOE templates form the Translation and Interpretation Intranet page -Translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed Sept/Nov/Mar Sept - June Sept - June 2018-19 CEP 68  New York State testing dates Middle school choice letters Senior Trip letters School Trip consent forms Fifth Grade Dance letters Art Expo letters/flyers Student of the Year Dinner letters Field Day letters Phone master SLT minutes Feb - April We use the following: -School-based personnel -Translation and Interpretation Unit -The existing DOE templates form the Translation and Interpretation Intranet page -Translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed We use the following: -School-based personnel -Translation and Interpretation Unit -The existing DOE templates form the Translation and Interpretation Intranet page -Translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed Sept. - Apr. Jan - May Jan - May Mar - Jun Nov - Apr May - Jun May - Jun Sept - Jun Sept. - Jun 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 69  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We use over-the-phone interpretation, in-person interpretation school staff and/or vendor/CBO, parent volunteer. ELL Parents Orientation meetings Ongoing (September - June) Open House Night September and May Super Tuesday Ongoing (September - June) Parent-Teacher Conferences November and March School Leadership meetings Ongoing (September - June) Curriculum Nights School Administrators meetings with parents Attendance teacher calls to parents Guidance Counselor calls to parents - ENL Coordinator meetings with parents ENL Coordinator calls to parents Spring Fling September Ongoing (September - June) Ongoing (September - June) Ongoing (September - June) Ongoing (September - June) We use over-the-phone interpretation, in-person interpretation school staff and/or vendor/CBO, parent volunteer. We use over-the-phone interpretation, in-person interpretation school staff and/or vendor/CBO, parent volunteer. 2018-19 CEP 70 We use over-the-phone interpretation, in-person interpretation school staff and/or vendor/CBO, parent volunteer. Ongoing (September - June) Art Expo Student of the Year Dinner Field Day Movie Night Winter Wonderland Enrichment Coffee Multicultural Festival April June June June October December January May 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. At PS 75, we use the Language Line phone script to inform parents they can call the school in their language. This allows parents who prefer a language other than English to reach school personnel in the event of emergency. In addition, we train school staff to use the 3-way call system to Language Line to incoming calls. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 71  School Language Access Coordinator will turnkey trainings on language access to all staff members. Also, school personnel will be trained on language access policies and procedures and Language Line information will be distributed to all staff members. School administration and Language Access Coordinator will monitor closely that all school personnel is aware and follows the policies and procedures to be in compliance of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At PS 75, the Multilingual Welcome poster is posted at the main lobby. Also, we ensure that limited-English Proficient parents are aware of their right to receive information, such as, language ID Guide, Parent Guide to Language Access and "I Speak. . ." Card. Oral interpretation and translation services are provided for all parents and family members who require assistance at school related meetings. Parents attending school conferences and/or educational planning conferences including annual reviews are routinely provided with translation services as needed. This is facilitated through the Assistant Principal, Language Access Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, School Social Worker ENL Coordinator/ teachers. In addition, Paraprofessional, parent volunteers and other school personal are available to assist with the process. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We believe that Parents are the sole determinants of our translation/interpretation services they receive, initially and in subsequent years. To gather feedback from the parents, we conduct an annual survey using the Language Line to survey parents about language assistance provided during the school year and how the school language services can be improved. We notify parents of the availability of those services and provide through parent meetings in the parent's preferred language). During the meeting, which we purposefully try to schedule during Family Engagement Tuesday as per the UFT contract, we give to a majority of our parents the parent survey which is used to gather feedback from them on the quality and availability of the school translation and interpretation services. During the meetings, qualified and trained personnel record attendance and are available to provide information and assistance to our parents on how to complete the parent surveys. We always provide the meetings in a language or mode of communication that the parent or guardian best understands. Once parents complete their surveys, we entered it as indicated on the Parent Survey form in the designated screen in ATS (ELPC) as forms are completed. 2018-19 CEP 72 
