2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X081 School Name: P.S. 081 ROBERT J. CHRISTEN Principal: ANNA KIRRANE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Robert J. Christen School, PS 81 321000010081 Kindergarten – Fifth Grade School Number (DBN): 10X081 5550 Riverdale Avenue, Bronx, NY 10471 718 796 8965 Phone Number: 718 796 7242 Fax: Anne Kirrane akirran@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Anne Kirrane Marisa Maher Marian Martin Amy Moore NA NA NA Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information MaribelHulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 mhulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 741 5852 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718 741 7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917 608 0230 Phone Number: 1-718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AnnaKirrane Marisa Maher Marian Martin Sinead O'Riordan Lucille Morgan MeighanQuinn *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Elizabeth D’Ambrosio Member/Teacher Shari Galligan Amy Moore Rod Brogan Renee Zalewitz Marissa Myers Victoria Averbukh Stephanie Cruz Member/Paraprofessional Member/ Parent- Chairperson Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our Mission 2018-19 CEP 9  In partnership with home and community, our school, The Robert J. Christen School, is committed to promoting a culture of civic and personal responsibility, a love of learning, and a sense of family within a safe and nurturing environment. Our Vision PS 81, The Robert J. Christen School, is a school of excellence. Our vision is to maintain a safe and nurturing child-centered learning atmosphere. We focus on implementing educational programs that promote high standards and a love of learning which contribute to the growth and social development of our children. We treat children as individuals and provide every child with a supportive and appropriately challenging learning environment. We celebrate our cultural and ethnic diversity and strive to create an atmosphere of tolerance that will be the foundation of our children’s lives. Our educational program prepares our children to be productive, literate members of their community and our democratic society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 81, The Robert J. Christen School, is an elementary school of excellence, located in the northwest area of the Bronx. P.S. 81 has been identified as a Well Developed school. It is a K-5 school servicing approximately 730 students. The building utilization rate is 100%. All students, with the exception of some students with disabilities, live in the community. Our educational program prepares our children to be productive, literate members of their communities by supporting student achievement as indicated in the NYC Frameworks. Our goal is to maintain a safe and nurturing child-centered learning atmosphere. NYC School Survey shows that 97% of our families view our curriculum as rigorous. Ninety-nine percent of our families and teachers viewed our school environment as safe, supportive and trusting. The administration, together with the staff, fosters strong family-community ties, promotes high standards and a love of learning. Each student is treated as an individual, ensuring that he/she will experience an appropriately challenging learning environment. The school uses a wide range of data to measure student progress. Teachers continually analyze student work and academic data to identify student needs, improve instruction and assess progress. This process leads to the development of strategic goals for staff and students and promotes an environment for differentiated instruction. Teachers make informed decisions and offer a menu of approaches, choices, and scaffolds for the varying needs, interests, and abilities that are present in their classrooms. Our students are viewed as active and responsible thinkers. Teachers believe that learning should be interesting and engaging. To ensure that we foster critical 2018-19 CEP 10  thinking, we have increased our focus on the development and implementation of rigorous performance tasks in ELA, Math and content areas. Our focus on increased rigor of instruction resulted in a 10% or more growth in the specific tracking of key standards in ELA and Math. Additionally, our NYS ELA scores increased by 17% and our NYS Math scores increased by 9%. Our children delight in visiting our media center and library, reading developmentally appropriate literature, publishing their work in our writer's workshop, experimenting with science, exploring the solar system and outer space in our remodeled planetarium, researching projects in social studies and finding practical applications for mathematics. Our reading program exposes children to many genres, strategies, and skills. Our primary goal is to help our children develop a real love of learning that it is integrated into real life experiences. In order to facilitate this goal we have instituted the following: Big Brother, Big Sister Program, Student Government and the Super School Citizen Program. Our school is dedicated to accelerating the continuous improvement of both teaching and learning. Therefore, focused and targeted professional development is one of our top priorities. Best practices are clearly identified and promptly replicated. In partnership with school, home, and community, The Robert J. Christen School is committed to promoting a love of learning and a sense of family. Parental involvement is highly valued and respected. Our administration and staff are dedicated to working together, in concert with families, in order to ensure that positive learning experiences are made available to all students. We collaborate with Manhattan College, Fordham University, Lehman College and The College of Mount Saint Vincent. We have partnerships with Lincoln Center, Henry Street Settlement, New York City Ballet, NY Philharmonic, Riverdale Neighborhood House, the Riverdale "Y" & The Morningside Center for Social & Emotional Well Being. New Horizons sponsors an after- school program for our children in the school. . 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body includes 12% English as a New Language and 16.4% Students With Disabilities. Our student population is very diverse. The ethnic breakdown of our school is 48.6% Hispanic, 30.19% White, 9.28% African American, and 8.10% Asian. The greatest area of focus is how our students access the curriculum. We support our students in accessing the curriculum through partnerships, differentiated materials and products. Through data analysis and use of RTI, teachers modify the curriculum to allow ENL and SWD students to access the material successfully. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School’s Strengths/ Accomplishments Our Educational Program: Engages and involves families in the life of the school. Collaborates with organizations that will provide enrichment and cultural opportunities across the subject areas through a variety of experiences such as: trips, in-house and off-site residencies. Fosters tolerance, promotes respect, and celebrates diversity. Assists students in becoming independent learners and thinkers. 2018-19 CEP 11  Promotes positive values that will foster leadership skills through respect, civic pride, and a sense of community. Immerses children in reading a variety of genres for the purpose of making connections, formulating questions, making interpretations, and reading critically. Uses the writing process to write freely and creatively, across genres; write for the purpose of research, write to prompts, and write in response to literature. Supports aesthetic appreciation by ensuring music and art are an integral part of the curriculum. Focuses on the development of mathematical concepts for application, process and problem solving. Uses scientific inquiry and research as the basis/method of scientific instruction and use of our planetarium to enrich the science curriculum. Focuses on the study of neighborhoods, communities, history, geography, government, economics, culture, and current events as a way to better understand the world in which we live. Uses technology to complement the curriculum. Provides intervention services to struggling students. Provides enrichment opportunities to all students. Encourages health and fitness . Our staff is committed to providing a rigorous curriculum. We have adopted from the University of Pittsburg’s Principles of Learning: “(a) Commitment to a knowledge core [through] an articulated curriculum that avoids needless repetition and progressively deepens understanding of core concepts, curriculum and instruction organized around major concepts and teaching and assessment focused on mastery of core concepts (b) High thinking demand where students are expected to raise questions, to solve problems, to reason, to challenge assignments in every subject and reflect on learning strategies, and (c) Active use of knowledge by synthesizing several sources of information, test their understanding by applying and discussing concepts, applying prior knowledge, and interpreting texts and constructing solutions.” We believe in developing each student’s strengths to become independent learners and to reflect upon multiple perspectives, exercise multiple attempts at improving work and extended thinking. We continue to develop and grow students’ understanding and work ethic that embodies the concept of effort. Outlined below is a chart that identifies our evidence for each practice. Curricular Evidence Pedagogical Evidence ● Curriculum calendars and units of study which are rooted in TC, Ready Gen and student data ●Data Specialist support ●Building leadership capacity ● Differentiated instruction reading complex text in all genres that has been aligned with CCLS ●Building leadership: Subject point staff ●Teacher buddies Assessment Evidence ● Assessment driven by standards ● All standardized tests ●Scantron ●Unit tests 2018-19 CEP 12  ●Data which drives instruction ●Common grade meetings ●Unit projects ●Mathematical problem solving using CCLS mathematical practices ●Identification of staff with particular expertise ●Unit writing pieces ●Science instruction which is hands on, involves journaling and culminates in an authentic school wide science exposition ●Maximize on the individual and discrete strengths of staff ●Social studies program which engages students in key projects which promotes student choice ●Maximize staff to provide multiple functions in a shrinking world of resources. We must see ourselves as a building of experts ●Arts program which engages students in authentic collaborations ●Classroom inter-visitations ●Professional development sessions ●Coach mentoring and modeling ●Classroom as lab sites ● Danielson’s Framework- mini observations ●Design & implementation of Performance Assessment Tasks ● Report cards designed by staff ●Interim Progress Reports for families ●Use of Rubrics ● Effort Rubric ●Use of Checklists ●Student work folders ●Art work ●Performances 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X081 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 725 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 44 44 36 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 12 36 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 48.0% % Attendance Rate 41.0% % Reduced Lunch 9.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 53.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 28.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6 0% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 70.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 78 77 92.7% 6.5% 17.8% 8.0% 7.3% 3.2% 2 0% 7.7 68.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our literacy instruction has been differentiated to meet the needs of each individual child. The cabinet, staff and members of the school community conducted a comprehensive review of school data from google docs for the year 2017-2018. The google docs data indicated that we exceeded our annual goal, as measured by an increase of two or more reading levels. Multiple assessments and resources as well as administrative decisions encouraging small group instruction and support from the coaching staff enables us to analyze the strengths and gaps of each individual child and create strategies that prioritize "growing" each child. Since each child is unique we, as professionals, learn and grow from this approach as well. Based on the NYSED School Report Card, 98% our of teachers say that students do reading and writing grounded in evidence from text and 98% of our teachers say that students develop conceptual, procedural, and applied skills in math. Based on NYSED School Report Card, our ELA scores have increased 9% over the last three years, from 61% to 70%. 2. In the area of math, we have implemented a new program, Eureka, that emphasizes critical thinking and problem solving skills. Based on our 2017-2018 NY State test and in-house school wide math assessments, a joint professional decision was made that support was needed in improving students conceptual and problem solving skills. Based on the NYSED School Report Card, 98% of our teachers say that students develop conceptual, procedural, and applied skills in math. Based on NYSED School Report card, our Math scores have increased 13% over the last three years, from 65% to 78%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of students in K-5 will show progress in reading as measured by an increase of 2 or more reading levels. This will be done with an increased focus in small guided reading groups as measured by TC assessments. By June 2019, 75% of K-5 students will improve problem solving proficiency as measured by in-house school wide assessments. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Administration identifies school wide trends using the 2017-2018 NYS item map data in ELA and Math. ● Reflect on unit plans with a focus on Essential Questions, critical areas and the Big Ideas (Understandings) for each unit to ensure they are aligned with CCLS. September to June Administration, teachers and coaches Students in K-5 including SWD’s , ENL students & bottom third ● Subgroups are also identified within school wide trends in order to close the achievement gap. ● Teachers identify student needs by using the data from the NYS test results and the school’s formative assessments. ● Teachers will share data and goals with parents during parent/teacher conferences at least three times a year ● Teachers will use MOSL assessments and individual student profiles to plan/adjust instruction, to meet the needs of the small groups Students in K-5 September to June Administration and teachers, coaches ● Based on formative and summative assessments, teachers will adapt their pedagogical practices to ensure ENL, SWD & bottom third students have the tools they need to access the curriculum ● On a daily basis, teachers will provide small group targeted instruction for the high-need population, such as ENL, SWD and bottom third, in both reading and math ● High-need populations such as ENL, SWDs and low performing students are provided additional support through RTI and before and after school instructional periods. ● Students are engaged in daily number talks and math application problems to improve their problem solving skills and understanding of how math relates to real life situations 2018-19 CEP 16 September to June, bi-weekly during grade meetings September to June, on a weekly basis Administration and teachers Administration and coaches ● An inquiry team of teachers across grade levels will continue to utilize protocols for analyzing running records Teachers and administration Teachers ● Teachers and administrators will participate in collaborative professional learning groups and ongoing inquiry with a focus on reviewing student work, identifying trends and creating an action plan for next steps ● Provide professional development for teachers in guided reading ● Coaches support teacher teams to select and plan questions that provide opportunities for high level thinking ● Teachers will participate in lab sites that highlight best practices in small group instruction ● Trained Special Education teachers provide professional development for teachers in meeting the needs of their struggling students including SWDs ● Our English as a New Language provider supports teachers by providing strategies and tools to assist in language acquisition 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administrators oversee and insure that parent communication concerning progress and curriculum occurs on a regularly scheduled basis. Teachers, coaches, SBST and school administrators are responsible for engaging families from September to June. Online communication between teachers and parents occurs frequently, as needed. Our professionals are trained to give specific feedback to parents about homework, projects, and suggestions for at home activities. Teachers provide parents with weekly homework letters describing the instruction their children will be receiving that week in class and ways to support their child at home. Monthly Focus Letters are created by teachers explaining the curriculum students are learning that month, activities they will be engaged in, and ways they can be supported at home. Homework sheets and Focus Letters are given to school administration on a weekly and monthly basis for review. Coaches hold parent workshops throughout the year to support parents understanding of the rigorous instruction and the Common Core Standards. School administrators engage parents during monthly meetings including “Coffee with the Principal,” School Leadership Team and PA meetings. Our parent coordinator is pro-active in reaching out to parents who are new to our school or may be experiencing a language barrier. Our school also makes an extraordinary effort to bring parents into our school community through events such as Fun Day, writing celebrations, workshops, special events and performances, volunteer opportunities, etc. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We are a school community that prioritizes the needs of our students, as well as the vision of working as a team. This vision lays the foundation for staff responsibility as well as flexibility which becomes crucial when we encounter budgetary decisions. -Professional learning around the following areas- Inquiry Teams, Common Core, Supporting Great Teachers & Leaders - Tax levy and Title Three funds will be used as a result of the conceptual consolidation process to support this goal to ensure that all students benefit - Out of classroom teachers will be scheduled to support classroom teacher lessons and professional development. - Coaches will provide professional development in the use of systematic observation tools and formative assessment grading practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% or more of students in K-5 will show progress in reading as measured by an increase of 1 or more reading levels. This will be done with an increased focus in small guided reading groups, as measured by TC assessments. By February 2019, 50% of K-5 students will improve problem solving proficiency as measured by in house school wide assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) For ELA, our measurements will include Teacher's College Running Records, MOSL and online progress tools ie. Scantron For Math, measurements will include in-house assessments, performance tasks, and online progress tools ie. Scranton Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. The parent survey 2018, on page seven, indicates that a small percentage of students have been bullied in our school. Data from our guidance, teachers, school support team and parents indicate that there is a need to continue to build a positive culture and provide support to students who have been identified at risk. 2. Through guidance personnel as well as online resources our entire professional staff has become more sensitive to bullying issues. All of our professionals are keeping a critical eye towards this potential problem. We have developed successful conflict resolution strategies as well as enhanced student listening capacities. We will continue our diligence in this area, as measured by OORS reports. 3. Through our PBIS programs such as the 4R program through Fordham University, Super School Citizen, Bucket Filler, Mindfulness, staff training in TCIS (therapeutic crisis intervention strategies) offered by the DOE, we will increase students social and emotional well being, as measured by OORs reports and parent survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of increased training and support for teachers in creating a safe and positive culture, there will be a 5% decline in the number of Level 4 and 5 incidents as reported in OORS. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Our school's participation in a Social and Emotional Learning study with Fordham University and the Morningside Center will continue to train teachers to create and foster a culture of safe and positive environments within our school community. ● Our staff will provide an emotionally secure environment Students in Grades K-5 including SWD, bottom third and ENL students ● Our staff will purposefully involve students to solve problems, develop solutions, create a tangible product which requires a deep level of cognitive engagement ● Teachers will have necessary Child Study Groups and implement Functional Behavior Assessment (FBA) and implement Behavior Intervention Plan (BIP) for students who require support. ● Teachers will receive training on SESIS ● Families will be engaged through Coffee with the Principal meetings, School Leadership Team meetings, Principal Liaison meetings and PA meetings to encourage a positive collaboration between home and school. ● The services of the guidance counselor, social worker, psychologist and SBST/IEP team will be coordinated to support the attainment of this goal. Trained and certified staff will facilitate training in the use of FBA and child study in order to use those tools to better support our students, especially those students with disabilities. Our social-emotional student support inquiry teams that will meet to develop support materials for classroom teachers. Teachers are working with Fordham University and the Morningside Center to train for creating safe and positive school culture. ● Students will be empowered to be a positive force of change within their own school community through Student Government and Guidance groups. September to June Administration, Guidance Counselor SBST/IEP team, teachers and coaches Teachers will check in with CST every 6-8 weeks to discuss child's progress Monthly Meetings Students in Grades K-5 including SWD, bottom third and ENL students September to June, Weekly Agendas and Minutes Administration, Guidance Counselor SBST/IEP team, teachers and coaches Monthly meetings October-June Students in Grades K-5 including SWD, bottom third and ENL students Administration, Guidance Counselor SBST/IEP team, teachers and coaches 2018-19 CEP 20  Developing powerful teacher-student relationships, as measured by the Danielson's Rubric on the HEDI scale. School Based Support Team and Guidance Counselor implement "Respect for ALL" activities on an ongoing basis throughout the school year.  Students in Grades K-5 including SWD, bottom third and ENL students  Grade Projects will be highlighted to support “Respect for All”.  School-wide assemblies will be in place throughout the year as well as Student Government meetings and Guidance Circle meetings to promote positive relationships between the students and staff.  Teachers will complete necessary Child Study Groups and implement Functional Behavior Assessment (FBA) and implement Behavior Intervention Plan for the students who require support September to June Administration, Guidance Counselor SBST/IEP team, teachers and coaches Monthly basis By January 2019, 2 school-wide assemblies By February 2019, teachers will have completed necessary FBA and Behavior Intervention plans for students who require support 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher/ parent communication is vital in this regard. Our professional staff makes every effort to engage our parents and let them know we are working with them as a team. We also employ a direct guidance approach and our counselor is in constant communication with parents if a problem arises. We have been employing new approaches that we will be relying on throughout the year, including movement and mindfulness, active listening, and building peer relationships. If behavior modification techniques are utilized parents are informed on a weekly basis about their child's progress. Our underlying but very consciously created, open door policy further allows parents to come in and talk with any number of personnel for a variety of reasons. Our parent coordinator is a significant link in this area. Within our school community, each grade level sends out a monthly focus newsletter to allow our parents to stay informed of school events, academic standards and goals that will be addressed, as well as additional ways to involve themselves in their child's learning experience. Our teachers also implement the Classroom Dojo application to allow parents to communicate easily and monitor their child's daily experience in the classroom. Parents are also invited to monthly "Coffee with the Principal" where there is an open forum meeting to allow parents to discuss concerns or celebrations within the school community. Parents are also invited to workshops to learn more about our curriculum, such as ENL workshops, Balanced Literacy and Math Curriculum workshops to develop critical 2018-19 CEP 21  thinking skills. Additionally, we have safety meetings to outline safety procedures that are in place. These are offered morning, afternoon and evening to accommodate family schedules. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PF Positive Behavioral Management Programs The services of the guidance counselor, social worker, psychologist and SBST team will be coordinated to support the attainment of this goal. Trained and certified staff will facilitate training in FBA and child study. Per diem will be offered to trained staff in order to provide additional support to meet the management needs of our students. Our social-emotional student support inquiry team will meet to develop support materials for classroom teachers. Our teachers are participating in a study with Fordham University and the Morningside Center to create and foster a culture of a positive and safe community in our school. Families will continue to be part of this equation. Insights and knowledge that we gain through these programs will be communicated to parents through interface interactions, workshops, and available resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ●By February 2019, with our proactive approaches, we expect an overall school decline among all of our students in reported conflicts. ● By February 2019, there will be a 10% or more decline in the incidents of students reported in OORS as measured by guidance and teachers' logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The number of OORS reports entered for the 2018-2019 school year. Additionally, we will measure progress by surveying teacher reported incidents and monitor guidance visits for repetition of students exhibiting the same issues. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. P.S. 81 has highly qualified staff. As such, we can focus on building capacity by supporting teachers to be leaders among peers. Teachers in our school are committed to improving their pedagogy and relying on the strengths of their colleagues. For example lab sites, peer planning, cooperative teaching and unified goals result in maximizing professional strengths and creating a learn and grow environment. Based on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Report, 98% of our teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school. Additionally, 98% of our teachers say that they feel responsible that all students learn. 2. As new and returning personnel enter the building we want to ensure that they feel supported in collaborative efforts. Our long range goal is to create a teamwork environment where every teacher feels resources are available. This will be measured by the NYSED School Report Card and attendance at optional professional development opportunities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of classroom teachers will use and continue to refine CCLS based rubrics to foster student ownership through the use of self-assessment and peer-assessment in all content areas. By June 2019, 95% of classroom teachers will have the opportunity to participate in a lab site to improve teacher performance and effectiveness. As per 4e (Growing and Developing Professionally) of the Danielson's Rubric, teachers' professional growth will be measured by student data using formative assessment to show a growth of 5% from baseline to endline in writing through the effective use of self assessment and rubrics. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1 ● Teachers will engage in lab sites, collaborative planning sessions, action plans and peer assessments. Professional development will be provided for teachers to determine how to effectively analyze student work, and identify next steps 1 1 1 Students in K – 5 and teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, teachers, and coaches ● ENL providers and Special Education teachers will work with classroom teachers to provide supports for the students who fall in high need areas ● Teacher teams will develop collaborative rubrics that incorporate learning progression criteria for oral (using student discourse protocols and/or Socratic Method) and written skills needed for providing evidence to support opinions or arguments. ● Multiple entry points and scaffolds for all learners (including ENL and SWD population) will be incorporated in the units of study and student work will be analyzed using differentiated rubrics ● Teachers meet weekly, in grade teams, to refine units, lessons, tasks, and create rubrics to assess the use of evidence to support a claim. Teachers will use these meetings to develop an understanding of instructional excellence. Weekly grade meetings; as needed Bi-weekly grade meetings Per Writing Unit using Teacher's College Units of study Weekly grade meetings, September-June 2018-19 CEP 24 ● Teacher teams will examine the students' ability to effectively use rubrics both for self-assessing and peer-assessing. ● Administrators and coaches and mentor teachers will support teachers by creating lab sites to share best practices ● Collaborative teacher teams will examine student work to identify student progress and assess the student use of student created rubrics and their progress towards taking ownership for their work. ● Direct Instruction of ENL population based on student needs both during school hours, before school, and after school will be provided by a certified ENL professional. Inquiry meeting at the end of each Writing unit October to May Inquiry meeting at the end of each unit Weekly ● Teachers meet weekly in grade teams to assess student work and plan lessons that demand evidence to support the student's thinking. Teachers in K - 5 September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, teachers, and coaches ● Teacher teams will examine student work, identify growth, concerns, create action plans and revisit to evaluate progress. Teachers in K - 5 Bi-Weekly ● Inquiry Teams – teachers, coaches and school leaders will facilitate ongoing gap analysis to carefully monitor sub group performance for ongoing adjustments to curriculum. Teachers in K - 5 Bi-Weekly Administration, teachers, and coaches Administration, teachers, and coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our staff engages our parents and lets them know we are working with them as a team. We have a team of school personnel who collaborate to resolve the needs and communicate effectively with our families. We have been employing new approaches that we will be relying on throughout the year, including movement and mindfulness, active listening, and building peer relationships with our students. All of these interventions will be shared with the parents to allow them to mirror these supports at home if desired. If behavior modification techniques are utilized, parents are informed on a weekly basis about their child's progress. Our open door policy further allows parents to come in and talk with any number of personnel for a variety of reasons. Our parent coordinator is a significant link in this area. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 25  Guided by administration, coaches, grade leaders, classroom & cluster teachers, using a model of classroom-embedded professional development, the P.S. 81 community will implement and facilitate professional learning communities. Budget allocations and monies will be appropriated to fund the Saturday Academy and After School Programs. ● Teacher teams will continue to plan and align curriculum and rubrics for assessments according to the CCLS ● Teams of teachers will meet to examine student work and identify next steps. Lab sites and professional development will be provided by the coaches and lead teachers to support teachers' craft. ● After School November 2018 -May 2019 *Schoolwide scheduling supports lab sites during common preps and open access periods ● RTI ● AIS ● ENL Staffing: Coaches, administration, grade leaders, and classroom & cluster teachers. Evidence: ● Meeting agendas and minutes ● Assessment instruments ● Data results ● Coach logs Formal teacher classroom observations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 90% of classrooms will be using student friendly rubrics to promote high level thinking and greater student discourse, as measured by the use of rubrics by teachers and students in all classrooms. This will be assessed in February 2019 using observation data and student data. **5B By February 2019 the administration will reflect on the progress that the teachers have made as measured by their Danielson’s Observations/rubrics, Webb's Depth of Knowledge rubric specifically related to the use and development of student friendly rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 26  The Danielson's Rubric will be used to assess progress: by February 2019 the administration will reflect on teacher progress Webb's Depth of Knowledge rubric will be used to assess higher level thinking and student discourse by February 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. One strength is clear and open communication with parents and teachers. Based on the 2018 School Report Card, 98% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed the principal/school leaders encourage feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. Additionally, the most recent Quality Review indicated that our school culture was well-developed. This is evident through our ability to establish a culture of learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. Another strength is setting a clear vision for the school. 98% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal / school leader communicates a clear vision for their school, staff and students. 98% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals. The Principal's high expectations for the students and staff drives student achievement. Based on the 2018 School Report Card, 98% of our teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal / school leader sets high standards for student learning. Additionally, the principal meets the the social and emotional needs of students, teachers and families. Based on the 2018 School Report Card, 98% of our teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal / school leader understands how children learn. Based on the most recent Quality Review, our school was well developed in the area of assessments to create a clear picture of student progress toward goals across grades and subjects. 2. The needs assessment indicates that there is a need to provide rigorous feedback to teachers.  The most recent Quality Review indicates teacher pedagogy needed to address the use of multiple entry points to meet the targeted subgroups: SWDs, ELLs, Bottom Third and Accelerated Students.  Analysis of student performance trends indicates that greater emphasis needs to be placed on the above targeted groups in order to bridge the gap with the rest of our student population.  Review of teacher experience indicates that there is a large number of first year teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 28  By June 2019, af teachers will have been observed and given actionable feedback around student engagement, teacher pedagogy and multiple entry points though the use of Danielson's Rubric and an increase of 5% will occur among teachers from effective to highly effective as measured by domain 3D (Assessment fully integrated into instruction, through extensive use of formative assessment). 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders will engage faculty in professional learning so that: Teachers October to May Administration and coaches ● Leadership and pedagogical relationships will be supported through an increase of lab sites, modeling opportunities, peer brainstorming and reviews as well as increased responsibility for grade leaders. ● A shared understanding of the Danielson framework is developed and teachers will be provided support and actionable feedback pertaining to the identified area(s) of growth ● Teachers engage in self-assessment using the Danielson’s Rubric and identify areas of growth ● Teacher teams engage in peer coaching, inter-visitation and the development of self-directed action plans ● Teachers work with a critical friend to support their specific needs ● The administration will schedule and conduct observations (formal and informal) ● Actionable feedback will be provided to teachers ● Purposeful planning practices are emphasized with a focus on aligning curriculum with the CCLS while addressing all subgroups. Instructional engagement and the power of strategic questioning will encourage effective student discourse. A positive culture for learning within an enriched classroom environment is the core of our practice ● The administration team will calibrate and conduct observations and review feedback (SOP 2.5) 2018-19 CEP 30 ● Administration will conduct an analysis of specific lessons in a risk free environment so that the staff grows professionally and learns to seek out colleagues for their expertise. Provide professional development and feedback to all classroom teachers using the Danielson Framework and on the new Advance system (SOP 2.5) Teachers Teacher effectiveness will be improved by deepening teachers’ understandings of effective questions to assess and advance student learning Teachers Effective use of office staff and School Based Support Team to provide increased opportunities for administrators to spend more time in classrooms to observe teacher practice Teachers September to June, as classroom observations occur September to June, through weekly professional development September to June Administration Administration Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our active Parent's Association and Parent Coordinator continue to reach out and involve families in a variety of activities. The administration maintains an open door policy with all parents as well as more formalized "coffee with the principal" and school leadership meetings. Our efforts range from including families in fun activities as well as offering guest speakers on topics of interest. If student conflicts occur, personnel, including school psychologist and guidance counselor effectively bring parents into the resolution process. Parents are frequently invited into classrooms as special guests to share their expertise in a variety of areas. The principal reaches out to parents at all P.A. meetings with the overall message that we are a community school and parent effort and leadership is crucial to student growth and progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding will support, grade and inter-grade meetings; One to One conferences, meetings with math and literacy coaches and differentiated professional development; follow up with classroom visits, building capacity with the effective modeling by lead teachers. Administration, Coaches and Teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the administration will have observed all teachers two times and provided them with actionable feedback with a major focus on student engagement, teacher pedagogy and multiple entry points. **5B. By February 2019, the administrative team will reflect on the analysis of the mid-year Danielson’s observations. They will review and adjust their action plan based on each component of Danielson's Rubric to determine areas that need further development. They will strategically utilize the Literacy Coach, Math Coach, Mentor Teachers and Collaborative Teacher Teams to determine next steps. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson's observations/rubrics and Webb's Depth of Knowledge rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2018 Parent School Survey indicated that parents would like to improve a better sense of community. Our efforts to engage families as part of our community include Fun Day, talent shows, movie nights, pajama day read aloud sessions, etc. Our Parent Coordinator makes a special effort to reach out to new families as well as families whose first language is not English. A variety of multicultural events are embedded within our school year, such as our International Dinner. We continually ask parents to inform us of their needs and suggestions to help us make our school an environment both they and their children want to be. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parents, including ELL and SWD parents, will indicate a three percent increase in satisfaction building a better sense of community as measured by the NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Funding will support parent engagement activities: 1. Parent Workshops, Coffee with the Principal, Principal Liaison Meetings, Monthly Focus Letter, Welcoming Tours, Weekly Homework Sheets, Science Fair, Writing Celebrations, Invitations to special academic events 2. Provide families with rubrics and lists of required mastery skills for each subject taught for each grade Parents, students including parents of SWD and ELL students September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Guidance Counselor, SBST, Coaches and Teachers *Parent workshops conducted monthly 3. Math Fun Night: Gets students engaged in math, familiarizes parents with math curriculum, and encourages families to continue practice at home 4. Literature Day and Night Event: Parents and students get involved in school academics by participating in a school book club that promotes fun and a love of reading 5. Family Fitness Workshop: Our physical education teacher identifies ways to increase fitness in our everyday life 6. Families and School staff workout together to increase fitness in our school. 7. Special Performances and Presentations by Students and Teachers 8. Workshops will be provided in the curriculum areas of all content areas and there will be a sharing regarding the instructional shifts that are required by the CCLS 9. Summer Reading Recognition Strategies to increase parental involvement: ● Provide a parent resource center 2018-19 CEP 34  ● Provide materials on issues of concern to parents, such as curriculum, child development, test prep, safety and SWD’s ● Curriculum Workshops: Literacy, Math, Science, Social Studies, Technology ● Workshops to support ESL students and parents ● Workshops on safety, positive behavior and developing good study skills ● Interim progress reports will be sent home two times per year providing specific comments regarding individual academic strengths and weaknesses. Building principal will conduct monthly open forums for parents to discuss ideas and concerns. Weekly child study meetings will target /identify students in need of additional support and serve as the avenue of communication with parents. Grade wide monthly unit newsletters will provide parents with ongoing communication. November and March Administration, Guidance Counselor, SBST, Coaches and Teachers September to June, conducted monthly Administration, Guidance Counselor, SBST, Coaches and Teachers September to June, conducted monthly Administration, Guidance Counselor, SBST, Coaches and Teachers Parents, students including parents of SWD and ENL students. Parents, students including parents of SWD, bottom third and ENL students. Parents, students including parents of SWD, bottom third and ENL students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We are extremely fortunate that our community has a variety of organizations that support family and community engagement. Some of them include: Riverdale Press, Community Board 8, Mosaic Health, Riverdale Neighborhood House, The Riverdale Y, New Horizons After School Program, Riverdale Mental Health, Wave Hill Family Activities. The list is quite comprehensive and offers outlets for many interests, needs, and family dynamics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 35  1. Principal and Assistant Principal 2. Guidance Counselor 3. Members of the SBST/IEP team 4. Parent Coordinator 5. School Staff, Literacy Coach, Math Coach 6. Teachers 7. ELL Coordinator Above personnel will be conducting Parent Workshops before and after school and paid per session for administration, coaches, and mentor teachers. Programs that will help support learning at home and in school  RazKids    Imagine Learning Front Row Ed.org ZEARN.org Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, parents will indicate a three percent increase in satisfaction in working to build a better sense of community as measured by NYC School Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. *Target grade will be immersed in the 4R Program with Fordham University *School wide PBIS assemblies will be held quarterly *Monthly school wide PBIS activities *Scheduled parent meetings with faculty, staff and administration Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS ELA, Scantron, TC assessments, Fountas and Pinnell, unit tests, teacher observation and conference notes Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Programs: ● TC Units of Study ● ReadyGen ● Fundations K-2 Small group academic intervention After school program Grades 1-5, including ELL’s and SWD’s Saturday Academy-Grades 3-5, including ELL’s and SWD’s Winter & Spring Academies Develop comprehension skills; Build fluency and stamina in reading; Develop writing skills with a focus on prompt writing and six plus one traits of writing. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, after school and Saturday Academy Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Students in grades 3-5 are provided with targeted instruction during or after school. These small groups provide instruction to assist students in order for them to acquire the skills needed to become strategic readers. Students in grades 3-5 receive academic support in test taking strategies and skills in our afterschool program. Students in grades 1 and 2 who are at-risk for not meeting State standards as determined by their performance on Teacher’s College Assessments are provided small group instruction and academic intervention during the afterschool program. Reading specialists, provide AIS services 2018-19 CEP 37  Mathematics During the day, after school programs and Saturday Academy NYS Math Test, Scantron, Unit tests, Teacher Observations Focus on building problem solving strategies and develop fluency with basic computation skills Small group instruction K-5 Eureka Math Engage NY Grades 3 -5 attend Saturday Academy in a “Pull Out” small group instruction model throughout the day. Students in Grade 3, 4 and 5 are provided with small group intervention during the day. Afterschool provides small group instruction to students in Grades 3-5 Students in Grades 3-5 receive small group support during Saturday Academy Grades 3-5 Afterschool program Science Assessments, unit tests, teacher observation and suggestions Winter and Spring Academy for Math and ELA Focus on grade level science curriculum and preparing students for the fourth grade NYS test. Repeated reading and hands on work. P.S. 81 provides additional science instruction during the Saturday Program. Social Studies Assessments, unit tests, teacher observation and suggestions, projects Making global connections and developing geography skills During the School Day and Saturday Program During the School Day All students receive state mandated periods of science instruction. Science Specialist facilitates small group instruction and/or individual instruction in science. Grade 4 receives two periods of science during our second semester Support in Social Studies is provided through content area literacy during the literacy block. Students learn strategies for reading nonfiction content reading and 2018-19 CEP 38  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Assessments, unit tests, teacher observation and suggestions, guidance groups with students at risk During the School Day Positive Behavior Intervention Services Focus on Pillars of Character At weekly RTI/AIS meetings students are identified for at-risk services by the Guidance Counselor, IEPTeacher, School Psychologist and Social Worker Multiple point people identified for vulnerable students writing document based essays One to one or group counseling with students. In addition, the social worker works closely with students and their families who are experiencing problems that have impacted the students’ education. Both counselors provide small group intervention discussions. The school nurse provides health related services on an on going as needed basis. Medication is dispersed as per 504’s 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. not a Title1 school not a Title1 school Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We currently have 45 students living in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 40  *Counseling for At-Risk students *AIS in reading and math *After school program *Saturday program *Bookbags, books and supplies *Parental support in connecting with community agencies/transportation needs 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $43,476 2018-19 CEP 41  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our collaborations with Manhattan College and Fordham University are important components of our recruitment efforts. We have a regular cadre of student teachers that we get to know personally and get to see their interactions and progress in the classroom setting. Recruits are always interviewed by a variety of personnel and frequently demonstrate their skills in a classroom environment. Our staff is always encouraged in both large and small group meetings to air their concerns and the administration makes concerted efforts to listen to alternate points of view and solve problems. Supports are available through colleagues, grade leaders and coaching staff. Grade assignments and duties are always discussed with effected personnel and their input is essential in our building. Professional Development is often conducted by our own experts and we are most sensitive to providing teachers with the type of P.D. that they request. Frequently during these sessions staff is divided into smaller groups so that needs can be addressed. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development is crafted by carefully surveying the needs of staff. Both in house and outside experts are brought in to support teacher growth. Our collaborations with Lincoln Center, Henry Street Settlement, and Fordham provide us with unique P.D. opportunities. P.D. is an ongoing activity in this building and takes place during grade meetings, inter-class visitations, coach settings and modeled lessons. Staff will engage in Professional Learning Communities within grades and teacher preference and needs. Our cycle of learning communities include Guided Reading, Literacy Centers, Social and Emotional Learning, Questioning, Learning through Movement, DisciplinaryLearning and the Power of Feedback. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 42  NA We are not a Targeted Assistance school 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). We are not a Targeted Assistance school Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). *Parent tours, Parent Orientation *Student tours, Student social gathering in August organized by the Parents Association *Students from local pre-schools are invited to join us for breakfast to see how our lunchroom operates *Kindergarten Cafe for new parents on the first 2 days of school, encourages parents to meet and begin building relationships *Kindergarten family meet and greet *SBST/IEP team travels to pre-schools to do Turning 5 evaluations and develop transition plans for SWD coming to our school *Articulation between Parent Coordinator and all feeder pre-schools 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet within and across grades, small groups and with Administration to determine and prioritize assessment protocols. Inquiry is ongoing to assess the quality and relevance of the data that is provided. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 2018-19 CEP 43  for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local $47, 632 $173,261 $12,366 $6,224 $4,573,301 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Counseling RTI/Enrichment Programs After School Programs (ENL) ENL Teacher TeacherSalary, Supplies, Paraprofessional salary, School aid salary, Technology, Educational Software 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 CEP 44   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 81 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 81 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 47  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Robert J. Christen, PS 81, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 CEP 48  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities, sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 49  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The rationale is to directly target and supplement the acquisition and mastery of English as a New Language. Many of our students come from homes that do not provide additional support in the mastery of the English language. As such, the supplemental direct instruction will target students needs to acquire vocabulary and learn necessary reading comprehension skills in order to read complex texts. The Title III funds will be used to provide a direct instructional program for our ELL's. The students involved will be a combination of entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding proficiency level students. All of the students involved in the newcomer subgroup will be invited. The program will be taught by two certified ENL teachers. The program will run for a period of 50 sessions. The extended sessions will be Wednesday's and Thursday's from 2:30 to 4:30. The program will use a variety of instructional materials including fiction and non-fiction texts and core books as derived from the Engage NY modules as well as various small group guided reading materials. The Front Row web based program will also be utilized to provide diagnostic data and will provide next steps and intervention strategies to address specific educational gaps. The Eureka curriculum will be utilized in immersing the students in mathematical problem solving and the language of problem solving. The direct instructional program will be implemented for the students in Grades 3-5 to support their reading comprehension skills, written prompt writing skills, and problem solving strategies as well as vocabulary development. The program will incorporate support strategies and various scaffolds to provide access to complex texts and support vocabulary development, language acquisition, and reading comprehension. The language of instruction will be English. Language proficiency will be measured through a growth model as evidenced through movement on the F & P continuum using the Teachers College Reading and Writing Assessment. Students will be assessed monthly for progress. It is expected that students will move at least two levels using the F & P continuum. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The rationale for our professional development sessions is to further support individual pedagogues working with ELL's particularly Entering ENL students in their classrooms. Professional Development sessions will take place afterschool from 2:30-4:30 for five sessions on a Wednesday. The teachers to receive training are the two certified ENL teachers working in the direct instructional program . The sessions will be facilitated by the Reading Academic Intervention Services teacher, Connee Garofalo at no cost to Title III funds 2018-19 CEP 53  Part C: Professional Development and supported by the ENL teacher/coordinator, Kim Jacobs. Professional Development will focus on supporting new pedagogues that work with this subgroup of our population. The seven teachers are new pedagogues that have ELL's in their classrooms/programs and the additional two certified ENL teachers working the Title III program. The teachers are Mr. Knecht(K), Ms. DelValle (1), Mr. Walters (Physical Education), Ms. Phelan (5), Ms. O'Connell(4), Ms. Antonnachio (Self contained 4/5). The objectives of the sessions will be around the areas of scaffolding, vocabulary development, developing oral language, and compacting learning for students to tackle rigorous and complex texts. The sessions will also focus on language objectives embedded into the units of study. The professional development will be designed to support the student's in the classroom. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of ENL children will be invited to attend six parent workshops to help support their children, improve academic achievement, and to accelerate development of the new language. One certified ENL teacher (Kim Jacobs), the Reading AIS provider, (Connee Garofalo) , and the math coach (Liz D' Ambrosio) will provide six sessions, for one hour parent workshops to support the parents of this population. Parents will be notified by letter sent home with the children. In addition, reminders will sent out to the invited parents in the various home languages. The parent coordinator will additionally share a variety of resources that are available to the families of ELL's. Parent volunteers and the NYC translation department will be utilized to translate invitations/flyers for our ENL population in their home languages, based on the parent's preferred choice of spoken and written language at the time of registration. Parent volunteers and staff members will be available to translate at parent workshops in addition to over-the-phone translation services that will be utilized. The Parent Coordinator will attend each of the workshops to reinforce the connection between the school and home at no cost to Title III funds. Examples of Agenda Topics Include: The Importance of Encouraging Mathematical Language in Problem Solving and Everyday Life Using Technology and Technology Skills With Your Children To Support their Learning (iReady, Raz Kids, and other educational websites) Promoting Adult Literacy to Support our Student population with Critical Thinking Preparing Our Students for Assessments Such As The NYSESLAT 2018-19 CEP 54  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $9,760 $732.00 $1220.00 Purchased services  High quality staff N/A $654.00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Instruction: Teacher Per Session 40 sessions=80 hours 2 teachers X 80 hours = 160 hours 160 hours x $61.00 = $9,760.00 Parent Engagement Activities Teaching per session: 6 sessions=6 hours 1 teachers x 12 hours= 12 hours 12 hours x $61.00= $732.00 (as explained in the narrative) Professional Development Teacher per session: 5 sessions= 10 hours 2 teachers x 10 hours= 20 hours 20 hours x $61.00= $1,220 N/A Classroom supplies, copies, notebooks, pencils, folders Purchase of materials to support direct instructional program Educational Software (Object Code 199) N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A $12,366.00 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name The Robert J. Christen School Borough Bronx School Number 081 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anne Kirrane Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kim Jacobs Teacher/Subject Area Jeff Gabrielson/4 th grade Teacher/Subject Area Diana Smith/Kindergarten Related-Service Provider Alisa Mahoney Superintendent -- Assistant Principal Maryanne Cullinan Coach Liz D'Ambrosio School Counselor Laurie Flanagan Parent Victoria Averbukh Parent Coordinator Nina Velazquez Field Support Center Staff Member -- Other (Name and Title) -- C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 57  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 745 Total number of ELLs 60 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.05% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our ENL teacher, administration, and coaches analyze the results of the NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, and Science assessments. The data is used to identify the strengths and weaknesses of each student. The ENL teacher, coaches, and the administration articulate the learners’ needs to classroom teachers and recommendations are made to the classroom teacher in order to help the students accelerate language proficiency. In addition, our school program uses a leveled reading assessment across a reading band that includes a running record. The teachers have administered the MOSL from Teacher's College. The reading comprehension score is converted to a TC level in addition to components of the eclas.. These assessment tools give a detailed picture of the child’s early literacy skills and are recorded in the individual child's profile. We strongly believe that data drives instruction. These assessment tools allow the teaching staff to determine in which areas the student needs additional support. Listening, fluency, sight words, vocabulary, dictation,decoding, and writing skills are also assessed. Attempts and 2018-19 CEP 58  mastery are recorded. Our building uses the Fundations programs to foster phonemic awareness. Various probes are used to assess the needs of the students and the data is carefully analyzed. Each classroom teacher administers a monthly TC reading assessment to their individual students that includes a running record and retell with a comprehension rubric. Grades 2-5 are also being assessed using a web-based assessment that pinpoints individual student strengths and weaknesses. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our classroom teachers have a yearlong assessment protocol calendar and are aware when assessments need to be administered. The data collected is entered into a class google document that was set up by the administration and data is entered by the classroom teachers. The document is shared with the ENL teacher, coaches, AIS teachers, administration, and all IEP service providers for close monitoring of progress and for programming further remediation. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our ENL coordinator and administrators carefully monitor the success of our ELL program from year to year and on a daily basis. The program is monitored by many different methods. The methods include careful data analysis of the NYSESLAT results including the results in each of the four modality levels. Using the RLAT report, careful analysis is done for each student over a three year period. Ongoing formative and summative assessments are administered to the ELL's. Our school community looks at NYSTP performance to evaluate the effectiveness of our program. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Using the baseline data provided on the RLAT report, NYS assessments (Grades 3-5), or NYSITELL an individual profile for each child is developed by the ENL teacher in September. This profile includes where the child falls on the Speaking continuum. The individual profile is given to the classroom teacher and a copy is maintained by the ENL teacher and the administration. The ENL teacher complies her copies in a yearly compliance binder. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Based on the RTI Framework, we assess our children to pinpoint their strengths and weaknesses. After that an individual profile is developed for each child that allows the classroom teacher to drive their instruction based on the data and the needs of the individual learner. The child is methodically monitored for progress to see if the individual plan to be adjusted. Administrators, the ENL teacher, and classroom teachers articulate with each other to see if the curriculum materials need to be changed. Tier 1 is the instructional core that is intended to incorporate high quality, evidence-based instruction, for all of our students. This includes instruction that has been shown to be effective for ELL's and differentiation to meet students diverse needs. Instruction for ELL's in English language development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. Students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. This extra support can occur in the classroom, but also in separate settings with instruction focused on specific learning targets. Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction should also be tailored to meet ELL's language needs and should be incorporated into research-based intervention strategies. Progress monitoring data is used to make educational decisions about changes in goals, instruction, and/or services; as well as whether to consider a referral for special education services. Within our RTI framework, we consistently do gap analysis gauging the efficacy of our language acquisition techniques. Universal screening of our ELL students is done appropriately as we determine through drilldown analysis, the level of movement that students have experienced towards mastery. Strong core instruction incorporates language acquisition across content areas, accessing background upon which new knowledge can be built, challenging students to problem solve and think in a high and complex manner, pushing the boundaries of accountable talk where the teacher takes on the role of facilitator so that students can take the lead in discussions. Targeted intervention is developed through the collection of formative and summative data as well as child watching to identify areas that are in need of more intense intervention and support. Progress is monitored closely, goals are assessed and evaluated based on comparable pools of data that are measured comparatively by peer grouping. 2018-19 CEP 59  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns reveal that the majority of students increase in their proficiency from year to year. Grades three, four and five students have either tested at a Transitioning or Expanding proficiency level based on the NYSESLAT with a few exceptions. Based on the results of the NYSITELL, more students enter school at a Entering language proficiency level. Based on the data from EDAT of the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT, one of our students regressed one proficiency level. Based on the EDAT tool, twenty-six of our students advanced one language proficiency level and five of our students advanced two proficiency levels. In the Spring 2018, seven of our students scored at a Commanding level on all four modalities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The data is discussed in grade meetings with a focus on trends. IQT meets to discuss data, strengths and weakness of our program. Based on these discussions, further discussions take place with the coaches that can meet with the administration for a final determination of what needs to change in the building. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per CR Part 154, the students are programmed for their mandated number of minutes based on their language proficiency level based on the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL. The program is a combination of Stand Alone and Integrated ENL. The students are grouped hetergeneously based on mixed language proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. At this time, there is no TBE program based on parent choice. c. DL program. If applicable. At this time, there is no dual language program based on parent choice. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL program uses a combination of Stand Alone and Integrated ENL in order to fufill the mandated number of instructional minutes. During the stand alone component, students are grouped in grade level groups with the addition of students from another grade based on their language proficiency levels. Students are not grouped with students more than two grade levels above or below. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Based on the mandated number of minutes, entering and emerging students will receive a combination of stand alone and integrated ENL in order to facilitate their language acquisition and their unique language development. Transitional students also receive a combination of stand alone and integrated ENL to further support their English language acquisition. The Extending students receive integrated ENL to further support their skills especially in the content areas. Our program uses 2018-19 CEP 60  various instructional approaches that include whole group mini lessons, small group instruction, and one on one conferring to help the students met the demands of the CCLS. Collaboration will occur between the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher which is vital for the student to foster language development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Over thirteen languages are represented in our building. Due to the large number of language groups represented by our students, it is too difficult to use formal assessments in the home languages represented. The only exception is the administration of the Spanish LAB that is administered to students with a home language of Spanish during the identification process, if they are not above the cut score on the NYSITELL. Although, all instruction is delivered in English, the implementation of Project Based Learning amplifies their content learning and domain specific vocabulary development. Students are not evaluated in their home language due to the fact we use the ENL model of stand alone ENL and integrated ENL. Students are assessed yearly using the NYSESLAT. Some students in the upper grades are given the opportunity to take the NYS content assessments in their home language. During the administration of the NYS Mathematics assessment, students in grades 3-5 may use a booklet in their home language, in conjunction with the English booklet. Our students are not eligible for the ELE or Spanish Reading test because they are not instructed in a bilingual program and do not receive instruction in the home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Each of the ELL subgroups has very unique needs for their academic success. The subgroups include the SIFE students, newcomers, students that have been in this country for 4-6 years, and the long term student greater than 6 years. We do not currently have any SIFE students or long term students greater than 6 years. In order for each of these subgroups to succeed their instruction must be differentiated. For the newcomers, we will utilize visual, picture, and kinesthetic support. Role playing and dramatics is vital for this subgroup. The students who have been here for four to six years will need to be targeted for small group intervention to bring them to the next level of their new language acquisition. Each of the students will need short term goals which will be assessed constantly. At this point, the student will receive remediation if the concept is not mastered. The ENL program follows the Balanced Literacy Model using all of the components including Read Alouds, Shared Reading, Guided Reading, Word Work, and Writer’s Workshop. in order to build phonemic awareness and phonics, we have implemented the use of the Fundations Program with the ENL students at the primary levels (K-2). Reading Comprehension skills are emphasized and embedded in units of study. All ELL’s would have access to the ELL Lending Library that has been set up in the ENL room, including math and various reference materials. 6a. SIFE-Currently, we have no SIFE students. However, we have outlined a course of action to address future needs. Students needs and placement will be determined by the HLIS. Students will be placed in the setting that is relevant to their age and needs. At this time, the school will administer the Inconsistent/interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) to all students grades 3-5 to whom the school suspects may have a gap in their education or may have an inconsistent education. If a gap of two or more years is determined, the school will administer the Literacy Evaluation for Newcomer (LENS) to a students whose home language is Spanish, Bengali, Chinese, Haitian Creole or Spanish in order to determine SIFE status. This process will be completed in a period of thirty days entered in ATS on he BNDC screen. SIFE students will be paired with students (peer partnerships) who speak their home language. Students will participate in the extended day programs, after school programs and/or Saturday program. The SIFE students will attend all appropriate Title III services. In addition, students will be provided ongoing support from the Guidance Counselor and possible support from our School Based Support Team (SBST). Parents will be provided the same orientation as is outlined for all ELL students. These students will need intervention services besides language support. 2018-19 CEP 61  6b.Newcomer -While research suggests that students acquire language within four to seven years of English instruction, under NCLB guidelines, it is expected that they take standardized tests. Therefore, in order to prepare the students, whose language is other than English, to take standardized tests we must be following this process. In the balanced literacy model, students are immersed in Read Alouds of all genres and provided opportunities to have accountable peer conversations about what they read. In addition, guided small group instruction is provided. The guided groups are strategy based and focus on helping students gain comprehension from what they read. Particular attention is given to increasing students' fluency so they gain meaning from reading a text. Instruction is also given to the students around mechanics, word work, and paying attention to punctuation as they are reading in order to improve fluency. In the content areas of Social Studies and Science, using the writing process there is a focus on prompt writing. Answers are modeled for the students and the student is guided through the process of answering a prompt correctly and concisely. Writing over extended periods of time is practiced. Students complete writing units and have peer celebrations. These practices help to build confidence in themselves and in their work. After interviewing and assessing the children to find out their level of language proficiency, an instructional plan is developed. The New Langauge Arts Progressions and the CCLS are used to decide on specific performance indicators. Materials and resources are matched to the needs of the students. The materials address the areas of grammar, basic sentence structure, reading comprehension, syntax and semantics of the English language. The students are encouraged to speak, listen, read, and write on a daily basis. In order to gain familiarity with the format of the NYSESLAT, we model and discuss each part. Students work with each other on simulated portions of the test. Areas of difficulty are identified and groups are formed to remediate students, who need support in individual areas of the test. Through teacher modeling, students are walked through the process of how to formulate short and extended constructed responses. Similarly, the students are given a simulated practice ELA test. Weaknesses are identified and based on the results groups of students are formed. The Test Sophistication unit is used to further familiarize the students with the genre of test taking. Simulated tests are given by the classroom teacher. The results are analyzed and the specific skills are addressed with the ENL teacher. Multiple data points are reviewed to get a clear portrait of the ELL learner. The information is used to provide the next steps for learning. The same procedure is used to provide practice for the ELA test 6c Developing- The plan for Developing ELL's is to offer continued support during the extended day programs taking place in the morning or afterschool. Based on the results of the NYSESLAT, the majority of these students have a weakness in the modalities of reading and/or writing. There is an emphasis on the modality of Writing according to the CCLS (Common Core Learning Standards). These students will build upon their knowledge of the English language in order to participate in more difficult activities. The students are scaffolded with explicit teaching in the identified area of weakness. The students are continually assessed and remediation is given as needed on a group and individual basis. The instructional approach for these students includes an emphasis on reading comprehension, critical thinking, writing skills including focus, supporting details, and mechanics. During small group instruction ( during and after school), these students are exposed to the various NYS assessments. The structures and types of questions are engaged in a test sophistication unit with the teacher. These students will be encouraged to speak, read and write in English. Students who exhibit behavioral problems will be referred to our Instructional Support Team (IST). The team brainstorms and outlines targeted actions and specific strategies to help support these struggling students in the classroom and during ENL. Students’ needs are addressed through supplementary classes in small group settings facilitated by teachers trained in ENL methodology. 6d. Long Tem ELL's-We do not currently have any students in the category of long term ELL completed 6 years. Based on our data, the students have either reached a Commanding level of their second language acquisition or have graduated. However, we target academic intervention to any student who falls under this category for a minimum of two years. Academic Intervention Services would continue until the student is on grade level as evidenced by the New York State assessments in ELA and Math. They continue to participate in all programs that are being offered for ELL's. However, we strategically assess their needs and the prior targeted actions that they have been receiving. These actions will be modified to ensure success for the future. 6e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status- Our plan for our former ELL's, that require transitional services based 2018-19 CEP 62  on the mandates of CR Part 154 , includes having this group of students receiving 90 minutes per week of instruction with the ENL teacher. The students will receive instruction in the content areas with an emphasis on the language that is required to engage in the text. The students will also be using technology, such as the Freckle program,to further support the new language acquisition. The entire school team makes sure these students are given the required testing modifications, extended time if necessary, and separate location for the period of two years that is required by CR Part 154. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The students in this category (ELL-SWD’s) need to have their unique needs met. These students would be supported based on their individual language needs. Constant communication between all teachers working with the children in this group is a primary concern. Lessons would be designed and implemented based on specific learning styles of the students. Appropriate learning and resource materials would be used. Visuals such as pictures, charts, and graphic organizers are used to scaffold the child's learning. Students will be exposed to complex texts and provided direct instruction with these texts. There are many opportunities throughout the day for speaking and listening practice. Students are supported through small group and individual instruction. Use of technology and centers would be used to support these learners. This category of students would be included in projects and all intervention programs. They would be exposed to all types of genres including nonfiction. Picture books would be used to support content knowledge and there are lots of storytelling opportunities provided in the classroom. Programs such as Wilson and Fundations are used in the classroom and Award Reading as well as Fundations in the ENL room. The diverse needs of ELL-SWD's are always considered and these students are placed in the least restrictive environment according to the child's IEP. In order to do this, the administration and the teachers communicate regarding curriculum materials, instruction, and scheduling. Students are included in various programs such as the afterschool program. We follow the RTI model and this year we will be implementing iReady which is a NYS certified web-based RTI program. In addition, ELL-SWD's are integrated in every facet of the school life. Examples include, Science Exposition, author celebrations, trips, performances, and special events. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ELL-SWD's are given all opportunities to participate in all instructional programs. ELL-SWD's are integrated in every facet of the school life. Examples include Science Exposition, author celebrations, trips, performances, and special events. The student's individual IEP determines how we program and what curriculum choices are made for the student. Our criteria for ICT classes is as follows, if a classroom teacher has academic concerns about a child's progress , the classroom teacher will articulate the concerns to the Child Study Team that is responsible for identifying needs and establishing an action plan. The action plan will describe the Response To Intervention (RTI) that will be put into action in the classroom. In six weeks,the child study team will reconvene to look at the progress of the child and the action plant that was put into place. If the plan is not sufficient for the needs of the child, the child may be placed in the ICT class to further support the needs of the individual child. The child may also be placed in ICT, at the request of the parent. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Students will be provided AIS as needed. After careful consideration, students that are functioning at the the transitional and expanding levels will be targeted for intervention in order to accelerate their success in ELA and all content areas. Also, students are invited to attend afterschool programs and /or Saturday programs. RTI protocols are followed by the classroom 2018-19 CEP 63  teachers. Data is carefully reviewed to allow students to be placed in the appropriate intervention programs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As a community, we have decided not to add any new programs, but all offered programs will be improved. All programs will be designed and implemented to accelerate the learning of the bottom third of our grade three to five population, which includes the subgroup of the ELL' s. The programs will be designed with Literacy and Mathematics as the two focus areas. There is building wide focus on Reading this year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, none of our programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELL population is an integral part of the school community and are included in all school programs. These programs include residencies, trips, festivals, and performances. There are many classroom and school-wide celebrations that include parties, writing celebrations, book fairs, and Science Exposition. Parents' of ELL's have access to interpertors during Parent Teacher Conferences and as needed to communicate with pedagogues and the staff members. Pedagogues and office personnel use the Translation Line provided the New York City Department of Education to communicate with families and various letters are translated into the home language. Other types of programs in our school community include afterschool intervention programs, and the drama production. The annual drama production is open to all students including the ELL's . The production is run by our Parent's Association. Letters are sent home inviting the children to participate in these programs. Our parent coordinator reaches out to parents and the staff answers questions that arise. ELL's are invited to attend afterschool and/or Saturday programs with an ENL teacher. Based on the last couple of years, our parents are very interested and the ELL students attend these programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Balanced literacy is used with specific scaffolding techniques to accelerate language acquisition is an integral part of our program. Technology is embedded within the program. The ENL teacher plans and implements various instructional activities that plan for different learning styles which include the use of technology. Students have access to the computer room and teacher designed tasks embed technology. Visuals, graphic organizers, and word banks are examples of scaffolds used within the classroom. The smartboard is used in the classrooms to provide pictures, short video clips, shared texts, and the incorporation of all four modalities. Classroom tasks are designed around the different learning styles of the child. Every classroom has a computer center, document cameras, and technology is used to supplement the curriculum whenever possible. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The only home language support provided is the use of peers with the same home language and reference materials. Currently, we have ten languages represented in the building and the number is constantly changing. The ENL teacher and the entire school faculty and staff are extremely sensitive to the home language benefits for all ELL's at all language proficiency levels. Our classrooms have home language materials. In the ENL classroom, glossaries and dictionaries in the home language are available for all ELL's and students are encouraged to use them to support their learning. Since our program model is stand alone ENL and Integrated ENL, we pair students to form partnerships for academic purposes and the emotional needs of the child. Parents of the ELL students are asked to be active participants and parents that speak more than one home language are enlisted to support the transition of newly arrived ELL's and their families. Many members of our community are fluent in many different languages . Some of the languages spoken in our school community are Russian, Spanish, Arabic, Albanian, Italian, and Greek. These staff members serve as interpreters for parents and students. In addition, 2018-19 CEP 64  they are often enlisted to support and comfort the emotional needs of students when they require support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Support and resources are tailored to meet the needs of the ELL's developmental levels and grade levels. The mandated services support the ELL's ages and grade levels. The services provided by our school meet the needs of our children. As stated earlier, the students are grouped based on grade level and the language proficiency level based on the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL. Resources and materials are tailored to meet the needs of the ELL ages and grade levels. Materials used by the classroom teachers and the ENL teacher is age appropriate. ELL-SWD's are provided with services aligned with the mandates of their IEP. Instructional materials are matched to the cognitive needs of the child in order for the child to show growth. As the child progresses, the text complexity of the materials increases and will require further supports for the child to be successful. All NYS assessments including the NYSESLAT are administered to the child based on their current grade level as per regulations. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Balanced literacy is used with scaffolding techniques to accelerate language acquisition is an integral part of our program. Technology is embedded within the program. The ENL teacher has a laptop and technology iand visual and auditory activities are embedded within the block of time. Students have access to the computer room and teacher designed tasks embed technology. Visuals, graphic organizers, and word banks are examples of scaffolds used within the classroom. The smartboard as well as document cameras are used in the classrooms to provide pictures, short video clips, shared texts, and the incorporation of all four modalities. Classroom tasks are designed around the different learning styles of the child. Every classroom has a computer center and technology is used to supplement the curriculum whenever possible. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In our building, before the beginning of the year all Kindergarten parents are invited to Kindergarten orientation. We also have a Kindergarten screening in the month of June. At Kindergarten screening the guidance counselor, literacy personnel , and Math coach are present to administer the screening. The ENL teacher also assists the parents with the process if necessary. Our parent coordinator reaches out to provide services as needed. As students are registered in the building throughout the year, the ENL teacher and/or the HLIS team members meets with the parent to administer the home language identification survey in the parent's preferred written language and conduct the oral interview in the parent's preferred oral language. If the use of a translator is necessary, the name of the person is noted or we make use of the Language Line. At this time, the identification process is explained. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our building has a Spanish cluster position. The Spanish cluster teacher is immersing the students in the fundamentals of the Spanish language and the Hispanic culture. The Spanish teacher is also teaching about the geography of Spanish countries. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? At stated earlier in the document, current the building does not have a dual language program. 2018-19 CEP 65  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher collaborates with grade teams on an ongoing basis. The ENL coordinator attends meetings and appropriate conferences and turnkeys the information to the staff. All relevant information will be turnkeyed to the staff during professional development and/or grade level meetings. The ENL Teacher provides professional development to the entire staff and grade teams. Based on CR Part 154, the entire staff will be attending professional development around the ELL population. Some of the sessions that are planned include discussing the changes and how it will impact the educational design in the classroom. Professional development will be presented to pedagogues and paraprofessionals around ELL topics, monthly, in order to support the needs of our children and comply with the mandate of CR Part 154. Examples of topics for professional development include, changes to Part 154 and the compliance requirements, different types of scaffolding for the ELL's in their classrooms, second language acquisition, and preparing our students for the NYSESLAT. Secretaries in our building receive professional development in welcoming parents into the building, use of the materials provided by the Language Access coordinator and the different types of forms that can be used at registration that have already been translated. The secretaries use translators whether over the phone, in person by a staff member, or other volunteers in order to communicate with families. Our parent coordinator receives professional development on organizing parent outreach and sending home notices in the parent's preferred written language. Our guidence Counselor and School Based Support Team receives professional development around ELL pertinent topics such as addressing the emotional and cultural needs of the child and their family. All pedagogues will receive professional development around the CCLS and content area instruction. Our building focus is providing support to our children in Reading and how that transfers to the content areas. In addition to, professional development in the building, the ENL teacher will attend any pertinent meetings being held by the Bronx Borough Field Office and in turn the materials will be turnkeyed to to the appropriate people in the building. Common Core Learning Standards are very rigorous. Our ENL teacher attends meetings and participates in ongoing professional development including weekly professional development, attending grade meetings, lab sites, and participating in various study groups. Topics of professional development include ongoing RTI measures and differentiation in our various units of study and curriculum materials for this particular subgroup. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Collaboration between the ENL teacher and classroom teacher is vital in helping the student transition to the Middle School. Information about the student is provided to Middle School as needed. In addition, our school guidance counselor "outreaches" to ELL parents and often 1:1 sessions are held with parents to explain/inform (translation is provided if necessary) about Middle School options and decisions. The guidance teacher supports the student's articulation to the middle school by providing support to the students, families, and classroom teachers. The information that the guidance counselor has obtained from professional development is used in parent workshops and parent outreach as the child transitions to the middle school. Professional Development will be provided to the entire staff around ELL pertinent topics. Fifteen percent of professional development will be devoted to topics pertinent to ELL's that include second language acquisition, co-teaching best teaching practices, and the integration of language and content instruction for English Language Learners. Our ENL teacher will attend additional workshops, conferences, and webinars in order to meet the mandate that states the ENL completes a minimum of fifty percent of her professional development hours. Required professional development topics will include language acquisition in alignment with the content area subjects, best practices for co-teaching, and strategies for content instruction for English Language Learners. Every professional development revolving this subgroup will have an agenda and an attendance sheet that will be signed by all members of the staff that attend the professional development session. These 2018-19 CEP 66  agendas, attendance documents, and other distributed materials related to the professional development session will be retained by the ENL coordinator in a separate folder, if needed, for review. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to Parent Teacher Conferences, a meeting will be scheduled for each parent individually during the outreach time on Tuesdays. Translation will be available to the parents. The purpose of the meeting is to discuss the child's language development progress, language development needs in all content areas, and all assessment results. Other school staff will attend meetings to sufficiently inform parents of their child's progress. Records of these individual meetings will be maintained in the school building. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. Parents are informed about translation services and their rights to have a translator present at all workshops and meetings.Letters are sent home prior to parent teacher conferences asking the parents if they will need a translator. A cadre of translators are available to translate during meetings and parent teacher conferences. Using our translation services allocation, we also access phone translations from the DOE list of providers. 3. The parent coordinator conducts parent workshops and makes certain that ELL parents are partnered with bilingual families. We have bilingual parent volunteers who communicate all information to assist parents new to the educational system. Parents are invited to attend all class trips. parties, writing celebrations, and assembly programs. We have different celebrations throughout the year. Our parent attendance is very high at parent teacher conferences and we ensure that interpreters are available for our ELL parents. Parents are actively involved in life at our school. They are participants in the following organizations: School Leadership team Parent's Association Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anna Kirrane, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Robert J. Christen School School DBN: 10x081 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anne Kirrane Title Principal Maryanne Cullinan Assistant Principal Nina Velazquez Parent Coordinator Kim Jacobs ENL/Bilingual Teacher Victoria Averbukh Parent Jeff Gabrielson/4 th Grade Teacher/Subject Area Diana Smith/Kindergarten Teacher/Subject Area N/A Liz D'Ambrosio Coach Coach Laurie Flanagan School Counselor -- -- Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Alisa Mahoney Other IEP Teacher -- -- Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/27/18 9/27/18 9/27/18 9/27/18 9/27/18 9/27/18 9/27/18 N/A 6/27/18 6/27/18 -- -- 9/28/18 -- -- 2018-19 CEP 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x081 School Name: P.S. 81 Superintendent: MaribelHulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jacobs Kim ENL Teacher Yes May 16, 2018 Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school has many methods for obtaining information on the preferred written and oral languages of each of our parents/guardians. Parents are orally interviewed in their preferred language at registration and the HLIS is examined to assess this information. The blue emergency card is examined to determine the preferred method of communication in written and oral methods by school key personnel. At the beginning of every year and periodically throughout the school year, the ENL teacher runs an RAPL report from ATS that includes this information. The information is shared with school staff and teachers for communication purposes with LEP families. Outreach is conducted by the Parent Coordinator. Translated versions of pertinent letters and the STARS report card are sent home in the parents preferred written language . 2018-19 CEP 70  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Bulgarian Chinese Greek Hindi Korean English Pilipino Russian Spanish Tamil 6 4 2 1 6 2 1 5 0.79 0.52 0.26 0.13 0.79 0.26 0.13 0.65 5 3 3 1 7 4 1 5 0.65 0.39 0.39 0.13 0.92 0.52 0.13 0.65 659 82.26 645 84.42 1 20 56 0 1 0.13 2.62 7.33 0 0.13 2 20 65 1 2 0.26 2.62 8.51 0.13 0.26 2018-19 CEP 71  Turkish Data as of 10/3/18 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Based on the data from 10/3/18, there are no languages that are 20+ or 10 percent of our population. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families  HLIS is given at registration September and at time of registration  Continued Entitlement Letters, Non entitlement letters, and Transitional Services Letter  Translated versions of NYC DOE documents September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All of translated versions of the HLIS from the NYC DOE twelve translated languages have been printed and placed in a master folder in the office to be used at the time of registration and for identification of ELL's. Each language has a folder with the home language surveys copied and readily available to parents and staff at the time of registration. The letters are printed from the translated versions on the DOE website and placed on school letterhead. 2018-19 CEP 72   Parent Teacher Conference letters   Annual NYS Testing information including the NYSESLAT various points in the year September, November, March, and May April and May Monthly Coffee wIth the Principal monthly Grade Show Performances and class celebrations throughout the school year Translated versions of NYC DOE documents Staff members and parent volunteers will translate the letter for the parents in the home language before distributing. If necessary, the letter will be sent to the Translation and Interpretation Department for translation. Staff members and parent volunteers will translate the letter for the parents in the home language before distributing. If necessary, the letter will be sent to the Translation and Interpretation Department for translation. Staff members and parent volunteers will translate the letter for the parents in the home language before distributing. If necessary, the letter will be sent to the Translation and Interpretation Department for translation. Staff members and parent volunteers will translate the letter for the parents in the home language before distributing. If necessary, the letter will be sent to the Translation and interpretation Department for translation. 2018-19 CEP 73  Parent Workshops throughout the school year Staff members and parent volunteers will translate the letter for the parents in the home language before distributing. If necessary, the letter will be sent to the Translation and Interpretation Department for translation 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night September Parent Teacher Conferences November and March, Open House (Gallery Walk) Teachers will set up individual conferences on as needed basis May throughout the entire school year Writing Celebrations Monthly Coffee with the Principal monthly interpretation service(s)? School personnel and use of the Language Line School personnel and use of the Language Line School personnel and use of the Language Line School personnel and use of the Language Line 2018-19 CEP 74  monthly School personnel and parent volunteers that are multilingual School personnel and parent volunteers that are multilingual. School personnel and parent volunteers that are multilingual School personnel and parent volunteers that are multilingual School personnel and parent volunteers that are multilingual School shows for each grade throughout the entire school year Parental Workshops throughout the year throughout the entire school year Celebrations in classroom throughout the entire the school year 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, the following protocols have been established by our school community. We have gathered important telephone numbers and dismissal procedures that have been recorded on a pink emergency form located in binders that are stored in the main office. In the event of an emergency, the individual parent can be contacted in addition to the blue card. In the event of school wide emergency, the binders can be used or taken with the building response team as safety procedures are implemented. School Personnel and members of our parents association will act as translators during a school emergency. In the case of an individual parent needing to contact us or vice versa the Language Line will be implemented. Our office personnel are trained in the use of Language Line and have the necessary information in order to gain access to the service provided by the New York City Department of Education. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In September, a professional development session will be held for the entire school community that is facilitated by the LAC. In this session, the goals of chancellor's regulation A-663 will be reviewed. We will discuss the importance of the providing the parents access to their preferred home language orally and written based on the preference at the time of registration. Important documents will be sent home in the home language and the importance of using translators based on the parents preference not based on the language of the child. We will discuss the poster that is displayed in the hallway of the building and the pamphlets given to each family so they can indicate if they speak a language other than English. Sessions in professional development will be held for all staff. 2018-19 CEP 75  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All of the above have been implemented in the building. The welcome poster has been laminated and is displayed in a prominent place in the building. The Language ID guide has been placed in the main office and at the security desk. The Parent's Guide to Language Access is given to parents at the parent orientation session that is held by the ENL teacher in September and as needed. It is explained to the parents how to use this information. All pedagogues and school personnel have copies of the Language Line number and detailed instructions about how to access to service for parents. Letters are also sent home prior to parent teacher conferences asking parents if they will need an interpreter. A master list is compiled by the ENL teacher and a list is distributed to all teachers. If the parents have requested an interpreter, arrangements are made with a staff member and if this is not possible teachers are prepared to use the Language Line. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will carefully analyze the data collected from the Learning Environment Survey that is completed yearly by the parents. Any necessary adjustments will be made based on the information collected. Parents will be asked for their feedback periodically. 2018-19 CEP 76 
