2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X088 School Name: P.S. X088 - S. SILVERSTEIN LITTLE SPARROW SCHOOL Principal: MELINDA HYER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Sidney Silverstein Little Sparrow School 320900010088 K, 1, 2, 3 1340 Sheridan Avenue, Bronx NY 10456 School Number (DBN): 09X088 718-716-7369 Phone Number: 718-681-6224 Fax: Melinda Hyer mhyer@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Melinda Hyer Samantha Nagel Erica Bravo AshleyOffenbacher EvelyngFlores N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 09 Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue, Bronx NY 10456 Superintendent’s Office Address: Lrosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-579-7143 Phone Number: 718-410-7017 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx, NY 10458 JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7188287776 Phone Number: 7187418895 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Melinda Hyer Samantha Nagel Ericka Bravo Shaniqua Santos EvelyngFlores N/A N/A N/A AshelyOffenbacher Marisa Danish Cynthia Adair *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ericka Bravo Alba Garcia Athenas Herrera Cheryl Ebanks Sandy Graciano EvelyngFlores Samantha Nagel Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? VISION STATEMENT: At P.S.88 we believe that with a growth mindset students can achieve higher standards. This mindset emphasizes that intelligence can grow over time and learners can always improve. It encourages students to view challenging work as an opportunity to improve their learning and skills. It enables them to recognize and honor the effort and persistence needed to achieve goals and creates a love of learning that is essential to reaching higher standards. 2018-19 CEP 9  MISSION STATEMENT: At our school a growth mindset is encouraged when:  Students are involved in challenging, meaningful learning tasks that cultivate their resilience and continuing achievement; Student progress is made explicit during teacher-student conferences; Students use different strategies and take risks to complete learning tasks;  Teachers provide feedback and praise that emphasizes effort;    Teachers monitor their own progress towards a growth mindset and teach students how to self-monitor;   Teachers support parents in understanding and promoting the growth mindset in their children. Students understand that success is when you work your hardest to achieve higher standards; 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 88 is an elementary school that serves 140 students in grades K to 3. We are a small school that faces numerous challenges such as facility issues, infrastructure and lack of budget and yet we still maintain high expectations for teaching and learning. Our staff has participated in professional development on Carol Dweck’s work on Mindsets. This work describes the impact of fixed and growth mindsets on student achievement. A growth mindset enables students to recognize and honor the effort and persistence that goes into achieving goals. A fixed mindset describes intelligence and talent as unchangeable and no amount of effort will make a difference. As a result, we redeveloped our school Mission and Vision Statements to show our commitment to promoting a growth mindset in all teachers and students. We have provided resources to parents through workshops and parent engagement events. All classrooms are provided with a large collection of books to support growth mindsets and our opening curriculum units are aligned to the purchased books. Teachers created an effort rubric to foster growth mindsets with our students. This learning journey became visible last year by ensuring bulletin boards message growth mindsets. In an effort to support a safe and orderly environment, PS 88 organically developed a student leadership program in which we identify students to be monitors for our breakfast, lunch and color guard programs. At times, the monitors are asked to support school events and parent meetings. Students identified as leaders have consistently demonstrated effort and persistence in the classroom, excellent attendance and follow the Five Handy Rules which is our school wide behavior policy. Monitors have job responsibilities such as games at lunch, bathroom monitor, and seating students at lunch. Monitors are rotated in an effort to have all students earn these leadership roles. One of the keys to our school culture is the Five Handy Rules which is a student friendly way of understanding the Chancellors Code of Conduct. We summarize the code of conduct into five phrases that represent academic and behavior expectations. Our Five Handy Rules are a key factor in a low rate of incidents as measured by OORS (Online Occurrence Reporting System). Our Incentive Policy is supported by our Five Handy Rules. We have incentives for attendance, individual student rewards and class rewards. Classes earn commendation cards for attendance, following the Five Handy Rules, goal orientated rewards and uniforms. Commendation cards are redeemed for class prizes throughout the school year and the class with the most commendation cards on May 31st earns a class trip to see a Broadway Musical. For the past three years, a new addition to our staff is a full time instructional coach. The instructional coach created a choir and its third year, it was expanded to include grade 1 students and the highlight of the choir is our participation in the American Young Voices concert. Our students were part of an 10000 student choir that was conducted by 2018-19 CEP 10  Francisco J. Nunez and a live band of professional musicians. It was a spectacular event that our students experienced. Our choir performs at school events. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. A strategic plan was put in place four years ago to identify special education students in self-contained classes that were considered ready to transition into general education classes for the upcoming school year. The criteria used to identify students are the following: they must be meeting their IEP goals and they should be socially and emotionally ready to make the transition. Schedules are created to mainstream these students for one to two periods a day to prepare them for this transition. PS 88 successfully moves our English Language Learners through an ENL program and teacher created curriculum units that ensure all students needs are met through explicit instruction. Strategic instructional strategies, scaffolds and differentiation is embedded in the units to support teachers in planning for instruction that provides equity and access for all learners. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Though progress is evident in our school goals which are aligned to the Framework for Great Schools two elements that stand out from the past year are the following: Strong Family-Community Ties – Parent participation at workshops that were facilitated by the principal grew. The workshops were interactive and designed to provide information as well as a connection to home while learning a strategy. The parents stated that they enjoyed those types of workshops and requested more. Though we have been successful implemented a parent volunteer program, we haven’t found parents to consistently volunteer for the past three years. This year, we were successful resulting in engaging more parents at workshops and interest in volunteering. Effective School Leadership – During end year summative conferences, all teachers stated that our cycles of learning during the 80 minutes of professional development impacted their pedagogy. Consistently shared by teachers was the use of analyzing data strategically with a targeted protocol. Teachers also spoke favorably in regards to sharing data and student work in vertical teams. The impact of this learning was evident in identifying focus standards for the upcoming school year and adjusting curriculum units. A key area of focus aligned to the Framework for Great Schools is Rigorous Instruction Though protocols and procedures are in place to track data, analyze data, and create action plans. The data is not closely tied to planning thus resulting in a data plateau and in some cases decline in performance. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X088 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 142 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 19 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 4 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 91.5% % Reduced Lunch 23.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 78.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.71 0% 31% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 1 1 92.0% 0.0% 17.6% 19.7% 0.7% 0.0% 2 6% 8.1 40.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In analyzing NYS ELA, School wide Instructional Reading levels, Advance, NYC MOSL Performance Writing Assessment, and Quality Review feedback, it was found: Strengths:  Monitoring instruction through summative assessments, school wide assessments  Using data actin plans for small group instruction  Teacher teams are collaborative and all stakeholders on their respective teams  Professional Development focused on using data and student work to impact instruction in order to carefully construct lesson plans  Hiring an Instructional Coach to support teachers in creating instructional plans aligned to student data, provide focused cycles of coaching aligned to inquiry work Areas in need of strengthening:  School wide Instructional Reading Levels as measured by running records using the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System indicate 33% met or exceeded their grade level benchmark which is a 18% decrease from previous school year  NYS ELA indicates a 1.9% decrease of students scoring at or above level from April 2017 to April 2018  NYC MOSL Performance Writing Assessment indicates 0.56 overall gain from Fall administration to Spring administration which is a 0.3 decrease from previous school year School wide professional development on collecting data, analyzing data and creating action plans that show student impact Implement teacher team protocols for meeting objectives, creating inquiry focus, analyzing student work   By embedding inquiry focus into teacher teams meetings, analyzing student work products and monitoring and revising our curriculum units, we will ensure that we are engaging students in a rigorous responsive curriculum thus resulting in an increase of student gains on summative assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 13  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By embedding inquiry focus into teacher team meetings, analyzing student work products and monitoring and revising our curriculum units, it will result in a 3% increase of third grade students scoring at level 3 and 4 on the New York State English Language Arts examination administered April 2019, results August 2019. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Once a week professional development for teachers dedicated to moving students as writers through the following evidence based strategies: effective conferencing, interactive writing, guided writing (direct/explicit instruction); Once a week teacher team meetings identify needs and plan strategy lessons based on student data Twice a month revising curriculum units and ensuring alignment using to Dr. Heidi Hayes Jacobs Coaching Protocols and the Tri State Rubric (see engageny.org); creating timeline for monitoring and revising units based on student work products, tracking data and analysis of writing from sub populations Three times a year teachers participate in data meetings with administrators and twice a month, teacher teams will analyze literacy progress of all students and creating action plans to address learning gaps; monitoring and revising curriculum units based on collected data; intervisitations to share exemplar practices of teachers during writing instruction Once a month, provide workshops for parents that explore the common core learning standards and how the parents can assist their child at home; Teachers provide workshops to parents at the beginning of unit in order for parents to understand the teaching and learning their child will engage in during this school year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Coach All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Coach All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Coach All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Coach, Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Provide workshops to parents to promote our Vision/Mission on growth mindsets (Oct), understanding their child's reading level (Nov), Exploring the Common Core standards (Jan/Feb), how is my child being assessed as a learner (March/April) Summer reading (May/June) 2018-19 CEP 15  Teachers will invite parents to a minimum of two writing celebrations (scheduled dates to be provided my teacher and distributed to parents by the parent coordinator) and a minimum of two content area celebrations All documentation will be maintained on file in the main office. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Budget to support instructional coach ● Professional development plan ● Create a timeline monitoring and revising our curriculum units after examining student work ● Professional development to support implementing effective writing instruction ● Scheduling data meetings 3x per year ● Creating a literacy assessment calendar and literacy curriculum unit pacing calendar and prepare for distribution September ● Teacher teams create and distribute monthly common planning calendar Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Tracking student progress in reading and writing at benchmarks (BOY, MOY, EOY) ● Progress monitoring of readers in intervals (Nov 19-Nov 30 and March 12-March 26) ● Classroom teachers maintain literacy assessment binder ● School wide data on reading levels distributed 3x per year (by October 31st, by February 28th, by June 19th) ● Rubric aligned to curriculum unit revisions (curriculum unit revisions include, sequenced teaching points designed to advance students through the content, metacognitive strategies, Universal Design for Learning strategies) Mid Point Progress monitoring of goal: 45% of all students instructional reading level will meet or exceed the benchmark in February 2018 as measured by the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The three instruments of measured used to measure progress are NYS ELA, Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, School created writing rubric aligned to CCLS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In analyzing NYS ELA and NYSESLAT results, it was found: Strengths:  On the 2018 NYSESLAT, 34 students were tested. The overall results are disaggregated into proficiency levels as follows: 6% scored entering, 14% scored emerging, 9% scored transitioning, 47% scored expanding and 24% scored commanding. The results of the 2017 NYSESLAT resulted in students achieving the following levels: 5% scored entering, 24% scored emerging, 21% scored transitioning, 42% scored expanding and 8% scored commanding. The gains which encompasses the growth in language acquisition and meeting proficiency are due to embedding ENL strategies into our curriculum units, addressing content and language standards and the increase number of students participating in programs prior to entering kindergarten. SWDs that were moved into least restrictive environments (general education classrooms) reached a higher level of proficiency/scale score versus SWDs assigned to the self-contained classroom.   Early identification of SWDs with potential to be mainstreamed in early grades for content and/or literacy instruction results in higher academic achievement on informal and formal assessments.  PS 88 created a school wide vision and mission around promoting a Growth Mindset culture  Implementing growth mindset units for each grade level aligned to student effort rubrics and purchasing additional texts to support the units  Parent workshops on fostering a growth mindset at home Areas in need of strengthening:  The number of students reaching on or above level on the NYS ELA does not produce the same gains as compared to ELL student performance on the NYSESLAT.  To support sub populations, provide more parent engagement activities with a focus of building a culture of success and student achievement through fostering a growth mindset, additional outreach to parents of sub populations to attend parent workshops 2018-19 CEP 18  By exploring how we can fulfill our potential through effort and persistence, we can foster growth mindsets in our students thus resulting in achievement on state assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By tracking students through formative and summative curriculum unit assessments, there will be a 7% decrease of sub populations (ELLs & SWDS) scoring a level 1 on the New York State English Language Arts examination administered in April 2019, results August 2019. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Flexible programming for SWDs: Mainstreaming into General Education classes during content and literacy instruction where best suited for student is conducted through identification and tracking student academic progress and social emotional intelligence. Ongoing as the SIT & LPT meets based on students needs. Once a week professional development will be provided to teachers to specifically address sub populations teaching and learning, topics to be covered are Content/Language/Speaking Standards, ENL Methodologies and using data when planning to ensure each lesson has multiple entry points Opening unit is designed to launch and Implement Mindsets (Carol Dweck’s work) curriculum unit in all classes using texts and promoting effort and persistence with implementation of student effort rubric; Mindsets is effective with sub populations and will be integrated throughout the school year when appropriate. It is observable in classrooms when effectively implemented thus resulting in embedded practice. Provide workshops for parents that explore the common core learning standards and how the parents can assist their child at home; Providing a series of parent workshops to support parents in understanding effort and persistence and helping parents foster a growth mindset in their child. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students with Disabilities June 2018 – June 2019, ongoing Administrators, Teacher All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Instructional Coach All Teachers September – October 2018 Administrators, Instructional Coach All Parents Administrators, Instructional Coach, Teachers, Parent Coordinator September 2018, December 2018, February 2019, May 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Administrators, Instructional Coach and Teachers will provide parent workshops that align to Vision/Mission statement, School Goals and Instructional Focus 2018-19 CEP 20  School Administrators will provide the following workshops: Growth Mindsets, Exploring Reading levels and supporting student at home, How is my child being assessed, Exploring Common Core Standards, Summer Reading Teachers will provide grade level specific workshops during the Parent Engagement block on Tuesday, Teachers will invite parents to two classroom writing celebrations Parent Coordinator will distribute workshop and event information to parents, all documentation will be maintained on file in the main office. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Scheduling and alignment of teachers, mandated providers ● Curriculum pacing calendar posted to Dropbox, provided electronically to teachers on thumbdrive, provided to teachers in Curriculum Binders, September 2018 ● Literacy Assessment Calendar and Pacing Calendar distributed June 2018 and September 2018 ● Budget to support an instructional coach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Progress monitoring student literacy achievement during intervals (Nov 19-Nov 30 and March 12-March 26)  and throughout school year Impact of learning incorporated into curriculum units and instructional plans as measured by Pre and Post assessments  Use of targeted instructional strategies to support sub-populations as measured by Pre and Post assessments  Tracking student progress 3x per year, by teacher, by grade, by school (BOY, MOY, EOY)  Observation of teaching and learning, monitoring/revision of discussion rubrics, MOTP school wide data Mid Point Progress monitoring of goal: 18% ELLs instructional reading level will meet or exceed the benchmark in February 2019. 25% SWDs instructional reading level will meet or exceed the benchmark in February 2019. (as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 21  The instruments of measure for this goal: NYSESLAT, NYS ELA. The instruments of measure to predict and track progress towards meeting this goal: Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, School created writing rubric aligned to CCLS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In analyzing the NYC Performance Assessment data and current Quality Review report, it was found: Strengths:  Data collected from the NYC MOSL Performance Writing Assessment was analyzed and teacher teams made curriculum unit revisions based on noticings in order to close the learning gaps  Data collected from summative assessments were corrolated by teachers to subsequently identify focus standards; strategies and tasks were identified and modified in curriculum units  Teacher teams analyze student writing and use assessment data to create instructional plans that are cognitively engaging and sequenced in order to move students as writers Areas in need of strengthening:  Based on student data, teacher teams vetted curriculum units, made revisions and must monitor the efficacy of those curriculum revisions more strategically in order to produce greater gains  Monitoring effectiveness of instructional decisions and their alignment to student outcomes By teacher teams collaborating and monitoring their instructional decisions, we will strengthen our pedagogical practices thus resulting in more significant student gains. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 23  By June 2019, improve student English Language Arts in all Grades as measured by an increase in average points earned on the NYC Performance Writing Assessment (MOSL) with gains of 1.10 or greater and average school score of 1.75 or greater. 2018-19 CEP 24 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create and distribute school wide procedures for administration of benchmark writing. Identify school wide protocol for analyzing student writing, calibrating teacher lens on scoring writing. Using data from the 1718 EOY NYC MOSL Performance Writing Assessment to make curriculum unit revisions. Closing the learning gap through analysis of student work. Teacher Teams Create and revise protocol for monitoring curriculum revisions based on student data. All Teachers September – Administrators, Instructional Coach Instructional Coach, Teacher Teams November 2018 September 2018 – February 2019 Once a week professional development triangulating standards based assessments, student outcomes and instructional plans. A focus will be explicit instruction. All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Coach Provide workshops for parents that explore the common core learning standards and how the parents can assist their child at home; Teachers provide parent workshops to provide ways that parents can assist their children at home in becoming stronger writers and readers All Parents Administrators, Instructional Coach, Teachers, Parent Coordinator September 2018, December 2018, February 2019, May/June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will invite parents to a minimum of two school wide writing celebrations and two content area celebrations, School administrators will provide parent workshops on growth mindsets, exploring common core standards, understanding their child's reading level and supporting their child at home in reading and writing, how to encourage reading over the summer. All documentation will be maintained on file in the main office. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Budget for instructional coach, parent workshops ● Professional Development plan ● Scheduling of Teacher Teams (weekly meetings) ● Creating and publishing Teacher Team monthly calendar ● Scheduling dedicated weekly teacher team meetings ● MOSL team meetings using per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Observations of teaching and learning ● Data meetings with teachers (3x per year) ● Curriculum unit revisions aligned to student data, uploaded to Dropbox ● Establish school wide protocols for analyzing student writing and revising curriculum units based on data, November 2018 Mid Point Progress monitoring of goal: 3% increase of students meeting or above level as measured by MOY Writing Data by class and Benchmark Assessment Window (Jan 11-Feb 11) BOY MOSL Writing Task (The goal uses data collected from a periodic assessment that is administered twice a year. In order to track progress meeting the goal and to use the data collected from the periodic assessment, data will be collected mid year from the following sources: Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, Baseline Performance Assessment - Writing Task (MOSL), MOY Class summary of student writing aligned to a common core standards rubric) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure used to assess this goal: NYC Performance Assessment. The instruments of measure used to track and predict progress towards meeting this goal: Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, School created writing rubric aligned to CCLS 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In analyzing school data and information from Advance and Quality Review, it was found: Strengths:  In June, all teachers review multiple data sources, analyze data which results in creating a school wide Instructional Focus which is review and refined in September once all data becomes available  Administrators are calibrated using the Danielson Framework for Teaching as an evaluative tool for observing teachers  Observation data collected in Advance is regularly viewed in order to monitor how teachers are implementing feedback and progress towards meeting school goals  Professional development is aligned to instructional focus and goals and is revised based on observation data, student assessment data and student work  Professional development cycles of learning aligned to school goals and instructional focus  Distributed leadership practices structures are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership Areas in need of strengthening:  Due to student enrollment, all staff have full programs making class coverage for intervisitations challenging  Teachers reflective practice using feedback to create actionable steps to improve teacher practice resulting in student outcomes Intervisitations structured to meet needs based on observation feedback, protocol for intervisitation Inquiry work around effective pedagogical strategies Identify and create a portfolio of exemplars for use in cycles of learning    By creating opportunities for sharing exemplary practices within our school through intervisitations and allocating funding for an instructional coach, we will strengthen instructional practices impacting student outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 28  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the top 75% of teachers will score an average of 2.75 on components 1e/3c as measured by the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric, data calculations provided in the ADVANCE Web Application. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Once a week professional development will focus on designing coherent instruction and engaging students in learning through using data to create instructional plans, examining student work using protocols, revising curriculum unit teaching points and resources to support student learning Administrators will provide actionable feedback for improvement of pedagogical practice during the observation process; administrators and teacher feedback conferences will support improve of practice. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Coach All Teachers October 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Coach Administrators will visit classrooms within two weeks following observation feedback to identify teacher's implementation of feedback received All Teachers October 2018- May 2019 Administrators, Teachers Twice a month, teachers are monitoring and revising curriculum units that sequence learning of content that is cognitively engaging for all learners with specified multiple entry points All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Coach Provide workshops for parents that explore the common core learning standards and how the parents can assist their child at home; Teachers provide parent workshops to provide ways that parents can assist their children at home in becoming stronger writers and readers All Parents Administrators, Instructional Coach, Teachers, Parent Coordinator September 2018, November 2018, February 2019, June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Administrators, Instructional Coach and Teachers will provide parent workshops that align to Vision/Mission  statement, School Goals and Instructional Focus School Administrators will provide the following workshops: Growth Mindsets, Exploring Reading levels and supporting student at home, How is my child being assessed, Exploring Common Core Standards, Summer Reading  Teachers will provide grade level specific workshops during the Parent Engagement block on Tuesday, Teachers will invite parents to a minimum of four classroom celebrations 2018-19 CEP 30   Parent Coordinator will distribute workshop and event information to parents, all documentation will be maintained on file in the main office. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Dedicated Professional development time to explore instructional practices aligned to Danielson Framework for Teaching ● Advance system for tracking ● Administrative scheduling to accommodate intervisitations ● Budget allocated to hire an instructional coach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ●Observation feedback ●Advance data – school wide report in January/March/June ●Professional development documentation maintained on file Mid Point Progress monitoring of goal: By January 2019, the top 75% of teachers will average 2.65 or higher on components 1e/3c as measured by the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MPPR, Benchmark Assessment Window, Professional Development Plan Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In analyzing parent involvement at PS 88 using data from NYC School Survey, PTA meetings, Parent Workshops, School events, Writing celebrations and 40 minute dedicated Parent engagement time, it was found: Strengths:   School Quality Snapshot indicates that 94% of parents say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance School Quality Snapshot indicates that 94% of parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn  Teachers utilized parent engagement block on Tuesdays for parent workshops, conferences and class celebrations as per teacher survey  Parent attendance at workshops increased due to the high level of interest in the topics of the offered workshops  Parent volunteers regularly supported the school Areas in need of strengthening:     School Quality Snapshot indicates that 88% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child School Quality Snapshot indicates that 69% of families say that they had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school School wide class celebrations will increase as teachers will schedule and invite parents to a minimum of two writing celebrations and two content area celebrations Identify and encourage parents to volunteer and be supported by existing parent volunteers By increasing the types and frequency of activities we provide at PS 88, we will build stronger partnerships thus resulting in an active and successful PTA and increased parent involvement including parent volunteers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 32  By engaging parents in volunteer activities and participating in parent leadership roles there will be a 7% increase of parents responding positively to questions about Strong Family-Community Ties as measured by the NYC School Survey, results June 2019 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent Coordinator will create a monthly parent engagement calendar for Tuesday parent engagement activities. Parent Coordinator will distribute calendar and flyers to parents. Parent Coordinator will outreach to parents to identify, recruit and support parent volunteers. Parent Coordinator will create a parent volunteer schedule and support parent volunteers through workshops. Documentation will be maintained in order to determine impact. School will provide teachers with a binder for logging parent outreach and engagement activities on September 4, 2018. School created protocols and expectations will be communicated to all constituents at school year opening meetings, parent manual and PTA meetings. School will track data through a survey and collection of binders. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Parents All Parents October 2018-June 2019 September 2018-November 2018 Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers Parent Coordinator All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal School will coach and support parents in facilitating monthly PTA meetings. All Parents September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NYPL Grand Concourse Branch, Healthplex Dental Screenings, Johnny Mac Tennis Program, LEAP, Puppetry in Practice, CITE, Horace Mann Summer on the Hill, American Young Voices Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Parent Coordinator ● Per session funding for teacher teams to plan and create grade level workshops ● Materials for parent workshops, celebrations and meetings (I.e. paper, color copying flyers) 2018-19 CEP 34  ● Allocating funding to purchase materials for each teacher to maintain parent engagement binders, parent manual and tracking data through school surveys Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, increased attendance by parents at all parent engagement activities including PTA meetings, classroom celebrations and parent volunteers. Documentation maintained on file in main office and by classroom teachers. Mid Point Progress monitoring of goal: Tracking parent participation data from parent engagement binders and attendance sheets from parent workshops. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC School Survey, School created parent engagement survey for tracking parent engagement Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students identified as not meeting reading benchmarks, pre/post unit assessments in ELA Mathematics Science Social Studies Pre/post unit assessments, formative assessment data Pre/post unit assessments, formative assessment data Pre/post unit assessments, formative assessment data Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Guided Reading ● Strategic Literacy Centers Large group for mini lesson and small group for guided instruction ●Word Study ●Independent Reading Go Math, guided Math Due to budget, no funding to support the position. Due to budget, no funding to support the position. Small group instruction Small group instruction Small group instruction Guided Reading is provided three days a week during the day for 45 minutes allowing for 2 to 3 groups to be seen. (pending size of class) During the instructional mathematics block During the instructional science block. During the instructional social studies block. 2018-19 CEP 36  Crisis Intervention At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Itinerant mandated providers assist when a need for crisis intervention arises. Due to budget,there is no funding to support full time mandated services or at risk services. Due to budget, no funding to support the position. Due to budget, no funding to support the position. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 46/ 34.07% English/Spanish McKinney-Vento posters are located at the entrance where visitor's sign in and outside the main office. All records for students in temporary housing are maintained in the main office. PS 88 has a 2 day a week mandated guidance counselor who will provide at risk interventions for students living in temporary housing. Information is given regarding after school programs, assistance with homework, and academic intervention. If needed, students and families are given assistance with transportation. I.e. metrocards. Parents are given resources and assistance if a child is in need of glasses by first exploring free glasses programs. School supplies are provided by the school such as homework folder, work folders, pencils, etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Resources provided by the NYCDOE such as Hiring Fairs, Open Market, New Teacher Finder, Excess Hiring System are canvassed to identify potential candidates Strategies to support highly qualified teachers:  Teachers participate in high quality professional development sessions provided by instructional coach and administrators  Teachers are provided critical and actionable feedback from instructional coach and administrators, clear  expectations are maintained and all staff held accountable School goals and expectations are presented at the opening conference and the focus for all professional development  Data trends are analyzed and shared with staff  Pedagogues are placed in positions that align to their license area   Teacher teams meet weekly for planning and are facilitated by the instructional coach  Teachers receive individual strategic coaching support provided by the instructional coach First year teachers are provided with a mentor and receive support in the second year of teaching 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Instructional coach supports teachers in curriculum development and implementation ● Instructional coach meets with teacher teams once a week during common planning to support the teacher created curriculum units, understanding of the common core state standards, assessment, performance assessments, school wide alignment of checklists/rubrics and common assessments ● Monday Professional Development (80 minutes) provide staff opportunities to learn, work in vertical groups and grade/specialty areas 2018-19 CEP 40  ● Monday Professional Development (80 minutes) foci include NYSED/NYCDOE initiatives, aligning data trends to common core, citywide expectations ● Weekly Common Planning is an opportunity for teacher teams to create curriculum units aligned to common core state standards, plan for curriculum units, analyze data trends by class, grade, school wide ● Chancellor’s Conference Days are geared towards supporting teacher development and understanding of school wide instructional initiatives aligned to citywide expectations ● Off Site professional development opportunities geared towards sub populations and targeted areas of need are available to staff ● Teachers participate in FSC Professional Learning Communities for ELA, Math and ELLs Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). In late June, all preregistered incoming kindergarten students receive a packet that includes academic and affective skills and strategies parents can do in preparation for kindergarten. Prior to the start of school, all preregistered incoming kindergarten parents and students are invited to an orientation. At orientation, parents engage in a workshop outlining school expectations, curriculum and parent engagement opportunities. Parents and students meet the teacher, take a tour of the classroom and review expectations for kindergarten including common core learning standards. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 CEP 41  In June, all available assessment data is shared with the staff. Identification of school goals and instructional focus is drafted based on analysis and findings from the data. At the opening school year meeting with teachers, the finalized CEP goals and instructional focus is shared with staff. Professional development is aligned to the goals and instructional focus. School wide assessments decisions are made by committee and shared school wide and voted on in order to ensure that the decision making process is transparent. Weekly Common Planning, the 80 minutes on Mondays and Chancellor Conference Days support teachers in using data to inform instruction and ultimately impact student achievement. The benchmark assessments for literacy and content areas were created and established by teachers and revised to align to the curriculum units. Teacher teams determine the assessments and calendar for content area assessments. The literacy assessment calendar follows components from Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1Explanation/Background: 179,198 0 0 12,366 1,144,391 X X X 2018-19 CEP 42 Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5a, Part 3a, Section 5b, Part 3a, Section 5c Part 3a, Section 5d, Part 3a, Section 5e, Part 3a Section 5b, 3a Section 5a, Part 3a, Section 5b, Part 3a, Section 5c Part 3a, Section 5d, Part 3a, Section 5e, 3a, Section 6  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 43  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X088, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, School Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 46  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; Supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resources/Center Area or lending library, instructional materials for parents;  hosting events to support asserting leadership in education for their children. parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X088, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ●PS 88 will provide professional development throughout the school year; ●all students will be assessed on an ongoing basis. Student instruction will be based on formative and summative assessments; ●instructional staff will teach to the Common Core Learning Standards; 2018-19 CEP 47  ●instructional staff will teach toward individual needs; ●administration and instructional staff will be accountable for implementing curriculum; ●encourage students to develop and internalize solid methods of assessing information through the use of computers and the Internet as tools for learning; ●provide enrichment programs, pending budget, such as Theater Residencies, Puppetry Residencies, Author Residencies; and enrichment assemblies. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● holding the Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times; when a parent wants to meet with a teacher, a parent fills out a conference form. Forms are available at the security desk and in the main office. Teachers call parents and schedule appointments at a mutually convenient time. At the parent orientation, teachers will distribute their daily preparation periods to parents ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families by providing translations when appropriate or contact known translators to assist in translation in support of ELL parents and students ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding academic performance and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; (as found in the PS 88 Parent Manual) ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer in PS 88, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Meet the Teacher in September; Parent/Teacher Conference Afternoon and Evening in November; Parent/Teacher Conference Afternoon and Evening in March; 2018-19 CEP 48  Midyear Parent/Teacher conferences for at-risk students; Spring Parent Meeting in May; Parent meetings on Tuesday afternoons Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding the Common Core Learning Standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing parent workshops (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● Commit to and support the 5 Handy Rules 1. Respect yourself and others 2. Listen to your teachers and each other 3. Be prepared to learn 4. Remember school behavior 5. Respect your classroom and school building ● Send students to school every day on time; ● Send students to school dressed in the school uniform; ● Check to see that all homework assignments are complete every night; ● Check book bag for parent notices and information; ● Promote positive use of your child’s extracurricular time; ● Encourage child to read at home on a regular basis; ● Support school staff by working with them to ensure that our child receives a high quality education; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● Stay informed about our child’s education, by communicating with the school and responding as appropriate, by promptly reading all notices from the school either received by our child or by mail; ● Attend PTA meetings and parent workshops; ● Serve to the extent possible on policy advisory groups ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● Read and reference the Parent Manual distributed annually; ● commit and support PS 88’s FIVE HANDY RULES as identified in the Parent Manual; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always make a determined effort to finish my tasks; ● Follow PS 88’s FIVE HANDY RULES . 2018-19 CEP 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our after school program will service 37 first, second and third grade ELL students which includes former ELLs. After analyzing our 2017 NYSESLAT data, reading and writing have been determined to be the weakest as compared to listening and speaking for students taking the NYSESLAT. By increasing the number of proficiency levels we were able to refine how we identified and tracked ELLs at the formerly named Intermediate level. The results are as follows: 5% at entering, 24% at emerging, 21% at transitioning, 42% at expanding, and 8% at commanding. Therefore the ELLs targeted for this program will get the additional support in the after school program in order to support their achievement of proficiency or reach level 3 on the NYS ELA, meet or exceed literacy standards and content standards. Students will be grouped according to proficiency levels. In addition, first, second and third grade former ELLs scoring at the proficiency level are invited to participate in the program in order to provide transitional services and to support their progress and ensure meeting proficiency or excel at the standards as defined by New York State. The program will be held on Wednesdays and Thursdays beginning October 18th until May 10th. In total there will be 48 sessions which is equivalent to 96 hours of instruction. On the aforementioned days the program will run from 2:40 to 4:40p.m. The instructional language is English with native language support for those beginning level students. There are two instructors, one bilingual certified, one common branch. Each group is composed of approximately 19 students, the groups will rotate so that all students get language development. 192 hours of per session will be applied to have a supervisor however this position will ultimately be supplemented by other funding sources. The intermediate supervisor will conduct informal and a formal observation of teachers. This will ensure that the teachers are identifying learning gaps and aligning instruction towards closing those gaps. Using a thematic approach, the program aims at using language in an appropriate context to make the learning language experience meaningful and comprehensible. All language modalities, listening, speaking, reading and writing will be incorporated in a communicative interactive learning environment. The strength of the program is the experiences provided through content area instruction which address reading, writing and math skills in English. The Santillana Intensive English ESL program will be utilized to bridge language and content area instruction. The program uses a standard based instructional approach which differentiates instruction and addresses the linguistic and academic needs of students. The learning experiences provide for content area instruction which address reading, writing and math skills in English. The Santillana program will be supplemented by other instructional materials which lend themselves to the explicit teaching of cognitive and meta-cognitive strategies which increase academic learning. The materials will support vocabulary development, the building of reading comprehension skills, promoting better usage of English grammar in reading and writing, and the development of problem solving skills in mathematics. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information To build reading comprehension skills, we will use, Best Practices in Reading, level B, by Continental Press. This book promotes guided reading instruction and independent reading practice in order to activate schema and develop the cognitive process of each student. The reading experiences will help students construct understanding of elements such as, the main idea, cause and effect, sequencing, making inferences, and using context clues. Its use improves reading comprehension elements such as language knowledge, background knowledge, making connections, drawing conclusion, questioning, visualizing, and summarizing. To improve writing skills we will use, Practice Exercise in Basic English, levels B and C, by Continental Press. This book includes exercises that reinforce grammar usage, and word study. The writing activities are repeated in a variety of formats so students learn and retain the information that is being taught. The texts and exercises represented in this workbook focus on high-interest subjects from across the curriculum and all content areas. Other materials include, Practice Exercises in Basic Math, along with Essential Skills for NY Math. These books include mathematics exercises correlated to NYS’ grade-level objectives. The mathematics exercises represented in these workbooks reinforce math vocabulary to allow students to solve math problems that are challenging and engaging. Finish Line for ELLs will be used to prepare students for the NYSESLAT. It provides practice activities for the four modalities. Each lesson provides support for addressing a specific context for language acquisition: conversational language, academic language arts, academic mathematics, academic science and academic social studies. Our growing use of technology supports our ELLs through the use of visuals to build language and comprehension. We will purchase two document cameras for interactive lessons. For ELLs, this approach will be an additional visual strategy that will enhance learning experiences. The ultimate goal of the program is to bridge language and content in order to explore, clarify concepts, and promote language development. Active interaction is encouraged throughout the program and the learning process will include modeling, shared celebrations, presentations, peer explorations and the use of instructional technology to construct knowledge across all areas of the curriculum. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Bilingual and ENL staff will attend professional development provided by the FSC. We will identify learning opportunities that consist of instructional strategies, data and compliance related to ELL’s. In order to provide more learning hours for students we will identify no cost workshops provided by the NYCDOE. There are off-site Professional Development opportunities offered by the BFSC that align with our in house Professional Development. Both target creating instructional plans that provide scaffolds to allow for multiple entry points for ELLs and building a toolkit of scaffolds for ELLs. Teacher who attend these learning opportunities will turnkey to staff. During the school year, teacher teams and vertical teams 2018-19 CEP 53  Part C: Professional Development meet weekly in professional learning communities to address curriculum areas, standards based instruction as well as ESL strategies that assist ELL’s in the language acquisition process. Foci topics: Analysis of NYSESLAT data for grouping and differentiation of instruction, goal setting, progress monitoring, aligning instructional plans to goals, bridging content and language, setting language goals and objectives and Jose P. training for new teachers. Teachers have created curriculum units aligned to the standards which will now include assessment tasks and differentiated learning for ELLs. Topics are discussed with LAP team, teacher team meetings, department meetings and inquiry teams. Agendas and documentation are maintained in the main office. The LAP team will become integrated with the S.I.T. (Chancellor's Initiative). In order to effectively service our ELLs, we are in process of contracting SiOP to provide professional development to teachers. We have contracted them previously and found much value in the learning. The goal is to not only develop our pedagogy but to also impact our teacher created curriculum units thus resulting in English proficiency and academic progress. Teachers will explore the current research supporting the instruction of ELLs. Teachers will construct and implement the practice of lesson planning with language objectives. Teachers directly involved in the program will be given time to develop their program instructional plan in order to align date and goals. Teachers will meet twice per month for 1 hour for planning and professional development using "Making Content Comprehensible for Elementary English Learners" (c 2012 Echevearria, Vogt, Short). Off-site Professional Development for the school year will be determined once the FSC releases the catalog of learning opportunities for the upcoming school year. Professional Development occurs from 2:35 - 3:55pm on the following dates: September 11, 18, 25, October 2, 16, 23, 30 November 6, 13, 20, 27, December 4, 11, 18, 2018, January 8, 22, 29 February 5, 12, 26, March 5, 12, 19, 26, April 9, 16, 23, 30 May 7, 14, 21, June 4, 7, 11, 18, 25 2018. The topics for tehse sessions revolve around our CEP goals of moving students in writing therefore tracking data, identifying trends, planning for instruction, differentiating for student needs, planning scaffolds to allow for multiple entry points, and revising curriculum units to address language and speaking standards will be the foci. On-site Common planning occurs weekly by grade cohorts for 45 minutes: Kindergarten meets period 2 on Mondays, Grade 1 meets period 2 on Tuesdays, Grade 2 meets period 2 on Wednesdays, Grade 3 meets period 2 on Thursday. LAP/SIT meets bi-monthly for 45 minutes: September 5, 19, October 10, 24, November 7, 21, December 5, 19, 2017, January 9, 23, February 6, 27, March 6, 20, April 10, 24, May 8, 22, June 7, 2019. Agendas, sign in sheets and documentation is maintained in the main office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: We will offer Parent workshops provided by NYS certified pedagogues and NYS certified administrators to allow parents to explore strategies and skills students are learning for second language acquisition. Parents of ELL students will be invited to participate in two at no cost workshops focusing on the NYSESLAT assessment, one workshop with an educational consultant who will explore language through the use of puppets, two at no cost workshops focused on reading levels/developing language. All workshops will provide tools that parents can use to actively engage with their child at home in their second language. For workshops and meetings, parents receive a flyer in English/Spanish indicating date and time of workshops and a reminder notice 2 days before the workshops. The parents receive a monthly school calendar with events and workshops. In addition, there is a parent bulletin located at the main entrance. The targets dates for the workshops are as follows: October 26, 2018, December 21, 2018, February 15, 2018, April 26, 2018, May 24, 2018. All workshops will take place during the school day beginning at 8:30am. Interpretation will be provided by the Bilingual Coordinator or Parent Coordinator. In addition to the above listed parent workshops, we will provide a series of 5 sessions in the Spring from 2:35 to 4:00pm for parents to engage in information technology and building language. The parents will use laptops and online subscription services purchased by the school (Tumblebooks, Bookflix, Pebblego, World Book Online) to develop proficiency using technology and to engage in literacy activities with their child. Target Dates: November 14, 21, January 9, 16, 23. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. . 2018-19 CEP 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Sidney Silverstein Little Sparrow School Borough Bronx School Number 088 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Melinda Hyer Coach Marisa Danish ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Henri Lenogue-Ford Teacher/Subject Area N/A due to budget Teacher/Subject Area N/A due to budget Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Leticia Rodriguez Rosario Assistant Principal Priscilla Centeno Coach N/A due to budget School Counselor N/A due to budget Parent Evelyng Flores Parent Coordinator Shaniqua Santos Field Support Center Staff Member Sabrina Cruz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 150 2018-19 CEP 57 Total number of ELLs 36 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 24.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Analysis of the data is as follows: Kindergarten (Fountas & Pinnell): · All students, 69%, were approaching level C or D and 31% were on or above level at level E in the EOY benchmark assessment · ELL students, 92%, were approaching level C or D and only 8% were on or above level E in the EOY benchmark assessment In Kindergarten, teacher created units will focus on phonemic awareness, vocabulary and word study. Units are aligned to the NYC Passport to Social Studies curriculum and will include ongoing teacher created assessments. In addition, teachers will continue the use of CCLS that support the needs of the students as well as the demands of the core instruction. Entering and emerging ENL students will be targeted based to ENL services will receive two periods of intervention services, in addition to their mandated ENL service. Ongoing teacher-created assessments will allow teachers to monitor progress. 2018-19 CEP 58  First Grade (Fountas & Pinell): · All students, 60%, were approaching benchmark levels H or I and 40% were on or above level in the EOY assessment. Grade 1 benchmark is Level K. · ELL students, 80%, were approaching benchmark levels H - J and 20% were on or above level in the EOY assessment. In first grade, close analysis of running records reveals that many readers are experiencing difficulty with fluency at the word level as they are segmenting the various syllables. Therefore, fluency at the word level will be targeted for our using Wilson Fundations in addition to teacher created units focusing on vocabulary development. In addition to mandated ENL services, two intervention in ENL periods per week will provide at-risk students with strategies to strengthen fluency of high frequency words and words with complex spelling patterns and multi-syllabic words in order to increase fluency and phrasing. The overall goal is have students read higher levels of texts through explicit teaching of decoding and encoding skills. Teachers will provide multiple opportunities for application through shared reading and interactive writing experiences. Second Grade (Fountas & Pinell): · All students, 37%, were approaching levels K - N and 63% were on or above level O in the EOY benchmark assessment. · ELL students, 80%, were approaching levels K – N and 20% were on or above level 0 in the EOY benchmark assessment In second grade, analysis of the data revealed our area of need is not basic comprehension, but rather thinking beyond the text and inferring. In addition to mandated ENL services, teachers will provide two additional periods of intervention in ENL services to target through shared reading experiences Third Grade (Fountas & Pinell/EDAT): · All students, 39%, were approaching levels O and P and 61% were on or above level R in the EOY benchmark assessment. · ELL students, 83%, were approaching levels O and P and 17% were on or above level R in the EOY benchmark assessment. In third grade, teachers review data (EDAT) and noticed that results were low in the number of students scoring high in the reading modality. Targeted students, in addition to mandated ENL services, will receive one period of intervention in ENL service. Teachers will target effective strategies such as activating prior knowledge/predicting, questioning, visualizing, monitoring, clarifying and fix up. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? School principal analyzes and prepares data to be shared school wide. During each periodic assessment window or with release of scores, the principal analyzes and prepares data to be shared school wide. Initial findings are shared and collaboratively, school staff make further determinations and create an action plan to be implemented. Strategically, one or more of the following occur: creating a focus on instructional strategies, creating a school wide initiative, aligning to the annual instructional focus or revising teacher created curriculum units. Implementation of action plan is monitored through periodic assessments, classroom observations of teaching and learning and analysis of student work. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Early literacy skills are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell and teacher-created assessments. The data collected helps us to determine student progress, implications for whole and small group instruction and intervention. Teacher teams disaggregated the 2016-17 data (Fountas and Pinnell and beginning of the year (BOY), middle of the year (MOY) and end of the year (EOY) benchmarks) of the different sub groups to determine student progress and achievement. Teachers compared baseline data to the summative data and documented growth for all sub-groups: ELLs, Student with Disabilities (SWDS). Teachers compared students who were performing at various levels, such as those who were near, at or above grade level, as well as, those students who were below and “at risk.” EOY reading level data over the past two years shows that there are incremental increases of students meeting the reading level benchmark. For example, June 2015 31% of ELLs met the benchmark and in June 2016 32% of ELLs met the benchmark, however in June 2017, teachers noticed that there was a decrease in the ELLs meeting the benchmark to 16%. Review of the ELL Data Analysis Tool will allow teachers to target ELLs with at risk level 3 or greater for intervention in ENL services. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After scoring of NYC Performance Tasks, school principal created an analysis tool in order to disaggregate the sub populations. In doing so, teachers are able to make determinations about how the sub populations are performing compared 2018-19 CEP 59  to their peers. Teacher teams use data to refine teacher created curriculum units and ensure instructional strategies and interventions are appropriate. Those supports are monitoring for efficacy through analysis of student work and subsequent formative & summative assessments. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In September, teachers are provided a one page summary of each student, a class profile that identifies sub populations and student portfolio. Teachers review the data and identify preliminary needs in order to plan for instruction. The beginning of year assessment window is the first six weeks of school in which individual literacy and mathematics assessments are administered. At the conclusion of the benchmark window, teachers review both affective and academic concerns with ENL state certified coach and administrators and identify class trends and individual student needs with particular attention to our sub populations. The LPT collaborates as students are identified as in need of strategic instructional support/ intervention. This process occurs after each benchmark assessment window and tracking of intervention supports every 6 to 8 weeks. During the instructional day, teachers engage students in the curriculum through carefully constructed and sequenced lessons that advance students through the content. This is done strategically by aligning the units to the core curriculum, using appropriate resources and assessments, and tracking student progress by analyzing student work products. Curriculum units provide strategies for engaging sub populations through scaffolds and differentiation strategies. PS 88 created a discussion rubric to foster student use of academic language and created an effort rubric to support social emotional intelligence through the idea of foster a growth mindset. This is particularly important for our ELLs and aligns closely to the RTI framework and supports academic and personal behaviors. By aligning our curriculum units to content area instruction, teachers engage students in experiences that allows them to learn and apply what they know to real world experiences. The implementation of the NYC Passport to Social Studies Curriculum is engaging and supports the principles for ELLs in the RTI framework. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In the 2017 NYSESLAT 38 ELL students were tested. The overall results were as follows: 5% scored entering, 24% scored Emerging, 21% scored transitioning, 42% scored expanding, and 8% scored commanding. In the 2016 NYSESLAT 31 students were tested. The overall results were as follows: with 10% scored entering, 29% scored Emerging, 10% scored transitioning, 35% scored expanding, and 16% scored commanding. Though there is a decrease in the proficiency level, we continue to maintain a focus on our language experiences that students are engaged in throughout the day; the arts, choir, lunchroom leaders, accountable talk, alignment of curriculum units to common core learning standards. We also created and implemented a discussion rubric to support students in participation of questioning and discussion as defined by the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Due to the data, we have focused on explicit instruction to ensure that the teacher delivery is clear and concise with a narrow teaching point. By doing so, this will allow our ELLs to engage in learning experiences that are strategic and sequential in order to build their learning in a coherent and be cognitively engaging. In addition to the NYSESLAT data, PS 88 tracks student academic progress in three benchmark windows and two progress monitoring windows. Students are tracked in literacy and mathematics as well as through pre and post curriculum unit assessments. After collecting data, teachers, ENL state certified coach, administrators analyze data and make informed instructional decisions such as adjustments to curriculum units, instructional strategies, and identification of students for intervention. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Upon release of the NYSESLAT data in August, the school principal analyzes the data and disseminates initial findings via email to staff. The LPT reviews the ELL Data Analysis Tool and shares findings with staff upon return from summer recess. All data is presented to staff at the opening conference. The ENL teacher creates the action plan to address the needs of ELLs and collaborates with ENL state certified coach to ensure the curriculum units reflect the needs of ELLs. During common planning, teacher refine curriculum units, align instructional strategies, identify scaffolds and differentiation strategies for ELLs and analyzed student work. Particular attention is focused on sub populations. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Public School 88 has a student population of approximately 150 students of which 36 are ELLs (24%). The educational and linguistic needs of our ELLs are met through a standalone/Pull Out model based on student proficiency levels and time allotments as per CR Part 154. In order to provide for peer language model our ENL Coordinator /ENL Teacher provides a heterogeneously grouped pull out program for Kindergarten through third grade. The goal of our ENL program is to enable our ELL students to develop the linguistic, cognitive, and affective skills they need to function in the school and community at large. One NYS/NYC certified and licensed ENL teacher will service 41 ENL students (of which 4 are commanding) in a standalone ENL program. ENL students receive ENL instruction based on their NYSITELL/NYSESLAT proficiency levels which is programmed in STARS. Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL Pull Out instruction per week (2 periods a day for 4 days). Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes ENL pull out Instruction per week (1 period per day for 4 days). Commanding students receive additional ENL support for a period of two years totaling 90 minutes of ENL pull out instruction (2 periods-twice a week) of ENL instruction. The ENL will work collaboratively with the classroom teachers to align instruction to the curriculum units implemented in the classroom to ultimately improve English language proficiency and academic knowledge. The teacher will utilize various data sources such as NYSESLAT/NYSITELL/Spanish LAB, periodic assessments, IEP recommendations and formative assessments to collaboratively plan instruction that meets the needs of these ELL students. Instructional plans reflect differentiation, grouping by proficiency levels as well as grouping by grade levels. Careful monitoring of students’ progress allows for the teachers to collaborate on implementing flexible grouping in order to ensure that all students meet the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher will use a theme based instructional approach and will use ENL methodologies to explore the academic content areas of mathematics, science and social studies which are aligned to the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. Theme based instruction will be used to increase meaningfulness of lessons in addition to ensuring comprehension and participation. Santillana program will be utilized along with Imagine Learning. The ultimate goal of our ENL program is to provide multiple opportunities for students to process the English language in meaningful academic settings that promote social (BICS) and academic (CALP) language development. b. TBE program. If applicable. PS 88 does not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. PS 88 does not have a dual language program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 CEP 61  The CR Part 154 serves as our guidelines for programming all class and ENL student schedules accordingly in STARS. This ensures that all mandated minutes are accounted for and that they are integrated within content areas, as well as, English language skills. In addition, ENL students receive instruction inclusive of Read Aloud, Share Reading, Shared Writing and Interactive Writing within a ht in small pull-out group session. All Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction (2 – 45 min. periods/4times per week). Transitioning and expanding students receive 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction (1 – 45 min. period /4 times per week). Commanding students receive 90 minutes per week of ENL instruction (1 – 45 min. period/2 times per week). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL teacher collaboratively works with teachers to plan for content, literacy and language objectives using- NYSESLAT data, EDAT data, literacy data (F & P Benchmark), Simple Solutions weekly assessments, Foundations, Passport to Social Studies, Unit assessments and teacher created K – 3 discussion rubric and the NYSESLAT rubric to assess speaking. Teacher teams meet to analyze the results of the speaking data (group discussions and individual student responses) to collaboratively target language outcomes. The ENL teacher uses best literacy and ELL research based practices. Our teachers have studied the SIOP model through Jana Echevarria’s Making Content Comprehensible for Elementary English Learners. The ENL teacher and Literacy Coach after analyzing data (2017 NYSESLAT, BOY and F&P) have created K – 3 thematic unit plans that are aligned to the Passport to Social Studies program, the Santillana- Spotlight on English K-3 program and the NYS Learning Standards (May 2017) . These units incorporate scaffolding language, scaffolding learning, as well as, encouraging students through hands on experiences to apply content language knowledge while integrating it into reading, writing, listening and speaking. The thematic approach is also used to support our students’ need for background knowledge and vocabulary. Explicit teaching of Tier 2 words by all teachers allow for ELLs to be supported as they develop academic vocabulary. Students are also immersed in other experiences through visuals, realia, media, frontloading vocabulary and trips. Our ENL thematic units incorporate technology as a means of grabbing students’ interest as well as allowing for differentiation based on learning styles. Language objectives and differentiated sentence frames are used to engage all students in academic discussions. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The language of instruction is English and appropriate scaffolds are put in place to support student native languages however, we do not have staff to address all languages represented throughout the school year. For measuring reading progress, Fountas and Pinnel Benchmark Assessment System is utilized. We do not have a TBE therefore to assess a child's reading level, it is conducted in English and the running record is conducted by the Classroom teacher. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The following will describe how we differentiation instruction for the following subgroups applicable to PS 88: SIFE, Newcomer, Developing and Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status. As per the definition of a Long Term ELL in the ELL Policy Guide and the grade band we serve at PS 88, students will not fall into this category. As per the years of service report, all of our ELLs fall into the category of Newcomer. These students receive instruction in their classroom in English. Teachers and the ENL Certified instructional coach ensure that curriculum units have embedded instructional strategies that support ELL students. All units have a pre and post assessment in order for teachers to identify areas of strengths and needs in order to tailor instruction to the students. Each mini lesson contains scaffolds that provide access to the learning and differentiation learner activities that is tailored to our ELLs. Using formative assessment, the teacher identifies the learning outcomes in order to sequence instruction for the following day. This ensures that instruction is cognitively engaging for all learners. Students identified as SIFE, Developing and Former ELLs are provided similar instructional opportunities which a focus on tracking their progress closely by the LPT team. In addition, tracking student progress every six 2018-19 CEP 62  to eight weeks occurs in order to monitor and revise instruction to ensure that these students’ linguistic and academic needs are met. By doing so, it provides an opportunity to ensure these students are progressing and to identify and potential academic concerns that might have otherwise been overlooked. The following supports are also available to support the linguistic and academic needs of our ELLs: Due to limited budget due to small size school, ELLs in grades K-3 receive small group instruction during the instructional day by the classroom teacher. ELL students in grades K and 1 will receive intervention that supports phonemic awareness and vocabulary development twice per week by an out of classroom teacher. ELL students in grades 2 and 3 will receive guided reading instruction twice per week by an out of classroom teacher. Reading intervention programs such as Great Leaps, Words Their Way, Kindervention will be utilized to improve academic proficiency in English. The instruction will focus on foundational skills such as decoding, fluency, word construction and building reading comprehension. Progress will be tracked and monitored by the LPT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL SWD’s are identified through the special education process which concludes with a final determination of services as indicated on the IEP. Currently, there are three identified ELL SWD’s in self-contained classrooms with English as the primary language of instruction and eligibility to receive ENL pull out services. The ENL teacher uses the Santillana Spotlight on English ESL program to provide services. Through the use of the communicative based instructional approach the ENL teacher establishes content objectives that are cognitively demanding and grade appropriate. Lessons combine comprehensible input with social interaction opportunities and include the use of TPR, visual aids, realia, manipulatives and audio aids. Furthermore, class presentations and celebrations culminate thematic units and support linguistic and social growth. In the ENL instructional periods peer buddies are used to support native language and improve comprehension. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional and schedule flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment through small group instruction. The ELL-SWDs are in the same groups with the general education students in their pull out sessions. These groups are created based on proficiency levels, individual student needs, and an ELL-SWDs IEP goals which are accommodated by the ENL teacher. This model allows for students on different grade levels, as well as ELL-SWDs, to participate in groups with general education students within the least restrictive environment possible. This flexible programming is used to ensure the time ELL-SWDs spend with their general education peers is the maximal amount. ELL-SWDs participating in any afterschool programs offered at PS 88 are also in the same classes as general education students. At lunch time, ELLs-SWDs eat at the same tables and at the same time as general education students. By encouraging general education children to interact with ELL-SWDs, we are able to help these children achieve their IEP goals and their language acquisition. PS 88 has two self-contained classes and does not have ICT classes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Students who are mandated as per IEP to receive ENL instruction are serviced based on their identified needs. For students who do not have an IEP and are deemed at-risk, the classroom teacher and administrators review relevant data, academic and affective needs which informs the targeted plan for each student. Due to budget reductions, small group instruction is provided in English in literacy. Student progress is monitored every 6 to 8 weeks and adjustments with program and group occur when deemed necessary. Within the classroom, students participate in learning experiences such as partner talk, small group guided discussions, book talk, group share at the end of a lesson, writing celebrations, poetry readings, storytelling, mini plays shared with audiences. Teachers use programs such as Spotlight on English and Wilson Fundations to support language acquisition. Small group guided reading is provided three times per week. During content area instruction, students are grouped based on data collected from unit assessments. Teachers monitor student progress through formative assessment and conferencing. District initiatives such as iReady are used to track reading and math levels and provide data to teachers in order to adjust instructional plans for ELLs. This provides additional data in order to target instruction through differentiation and provide strategic scaffolds. 2018-19 CEP 63  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Students overall tend to score well in listening and speaking. However, upon review of the EDAT data, teachers noted that students in grades 1 and 2 scored low in the writing modality of the 2017 NYSESLAT. As a result, teachers plan to revise curriculum unit plans to address the need of making writing a priority across all grade levels. Literature of high interest to students will serve as a source of modeling authors’ styles and good writing practices while addressing all genres of writing –expository, persuasive and narrative. Units of study will also include many opportunities to write- learning logs, response journals, self-assessment logs, peer assessment logs and quick write activities. Students will focus on elaborating and providing detail when demonstrating their learning in the form of a paragraph and or an essay. Our ENL teacher this year will provide intervention in ENL services focusing on targeting ELL students who have not met the beginning of the year (BOY) writing benchmark. Students will focus on creating a written response to ENL units using related prompts using the Writing Process – planning, drafting, revising, editing publishing and reflecting. Students published work will be assessed using an ENL Writing Rubric. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? All programs will remain in tact this year. We continue to have a low enrollment of Spanish speaking ELLs across all grade levels therefore we will maintain the ENL pull out-standalone program for all ELLs. PS 88 has an overall declining school enrollment therefore hiring of staff to support our ELLs is not supported by the budget. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students, including current and former ELLs are offered an opportunity to participate in all programs including enrichment, intervention and after school programs. This occurs by first identifying instructional needs followed by aligning students to the programs. Due to increased budget cuts, program offerings have been decreased significantly however, all ELLs will have access to all program offerings if the budget allows to have programs. The instructional coach gives up half her lunch to lead a choir and all students included ELLs are invited to participate. To date, the budget is prohibitive therefore supplemental services and enrichment opportunities that would occur after school cannot be scheduled. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL program uses the Santillana, Spotlight on English ESL program. This program covers all curriculum areas, grade levels, and proficiency levels and offers standard based activities that fit into all content areas. Our students will engage in the NYCDOE Passport for Social Studies instruction. Science instruction will be covered through the, Harcourt Science Program. This science program promotes hands-on exploratory learning and is further enhanced by our newly created science room which provides students with visuals and experimental materials that allow for active participation in the investigative learning experience. In the school library and classrooms, technology equipment such as document cameras, smart board, and individual laptops are used to gather and organize information and instruction. Annual subscription to online encyclopedias, science databases, and online book libraries are a key resource for ELLs. Most subscription services allow students to select languages such as Spanish. All students have access to subscription services (Tumblebooks, Bookflix, Worldbook online, Pebblego, RazKids) in school and at home. Websites, usernames and passwords are provided to parents and students yearly. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is not offered in the ENL pull out standalone program because the mandated language of instruction is English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All support services for general and special education ELLs are age and grade appropriate. Special Education ELLs are served as per IEP recommendations and services such as SETSS, speech, counseling, and physical therapy are based on individual needs. General Education ELLs who are in need of support are evaluated by the intervention provider and the classroom teacher in order to establish an instructional plan that will enable the student to meet educational standards. 2018-19 CEP 64  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? PS 88 does not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In the Spring, incoming Kindergarten students who undergo the NYCDOE registration process are invited to an orientation session in June. At the orientation session, they meet school staff, their kindergarten teacher and learn about kindergarten expectations. They receive resources and materials to use over the summer in order to get ready for the upcoming school year. English and Spanish are the languages offered at this orientation session. For registered students who are in grades 1, 2, 3, information is distributed during the final part of registration in preparation for opening day. For new admits that registered after the start of the school year, they receive a consultation with the parent coordinator who reviews the offerings at PS 88. In September, all parents are invited to our annual Meet the Teacher event. When possible, teachers offer the orientations in English and Spanish and for individual parent conferences, teachers contact the LTI Unit. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? PS 88 is a K-3 elementary school. Student receive instruction in English. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? PS 88 does not offer a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In September, the school reviews all available data and creates the instructional focus for the school year. The professional development plan is aligned to the instructional focus. All teachers are included in the professional learning communities in house and off site. Teachers meet weekly in vertical planning teacher teams with the instructional coach who is state certified in ENL. Teacher teams meet weekly in common planning sessions facilitated by the instructional coach who is state certified ENL teacher. The focus of learning is geared towards explicit instruction, appropriate instructional strategies and scaffolds and ensuring language acquisition is prioritized. Documentation is maintained on file in the office. All teachers participate plan their weekly common planning meetings prior to each month. The monthly common planning calendar is published and distributed prior the beginning of the month. Teachers use the common planning to analyze student work, data, and assessments to revise curriculum units that are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. Specific focus on sub populations which includes ELLs looks at how lessons are differentiated for our ELLs and ensuring there is a content and language objective addressed in our teacher created curriculum units. In addition all teachers work collaboratively with coach creating intentional learning opportunities to design, revise and analyze units to promote academic achievement in all content areas. Teachers receive ongoing professional development on created units and Passport to Social Studies curriculum. The curriculum is linguistically age/grade appropriate and aligned to NYS Learning Standards. Teachers learn how to identify needs of the ENL students they teach. They will then learn to address those needs through best practices. They will learn to integrate language acquisition and student inquiry in content area studies. 2018-19 CEP 65  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to support staff to assist ELLs as they transition from one school level to another, we first analyze data with staff. Professional development and support for staff to align instructional plans to standards is provided regularly throughout the school year. All documentation is maintained in the main office. For students that articulate out of the school, teachers assist students in creating goals for the upcoming school year that identifies strengths and weaknesses and is included with a portfolio and academic profile sheet. These items are sent to the articulating school in June so that they can appropriately place students in their fourth grade class. During professional development sessions teachers will receive instruction on how to utilize best teaching practices to provide integrated language and content instruction to support language development through language specific scaffolds. ENL teacher works closely with the Coach to identify school wide trends based on student work analysis. This work facilitates carefully designed instruction and utilization of appropriate scaffolds for the student based on their proficiency levels to promote academic achievement in all content areas. Off-site professional development opportunities when offered are provided to meet the CR-Part 154 requirements. All staff including teachers servicing ELL students meet with administrators to review learning and then create a plan to turnkey learning to staff. This allows for all teachers to gain information and knowledge to support the academic of progress of all students including ELLs. Documentation is maintained on file in the office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In September, two Bilingual/ENL parent meetings are held for newly enrolled students. In addition, all parents of ELLs are invited to attend a meeting that is designed to promote the expectations for teaching and learning at PS 88 as it relates to ELLs. We share how our curriculum units are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and how our instructional plans are allow for multiple entry points. We share strategies to help parents work with their child at home. Resources are shared with parents including our school purchased subscription services. Documentation is maintained on file in the office and a secondary file is maintained by the state certified ESL Teacher. The annual individual meetings are scheduled on Tuesdays during the parent engagement time. All meeting notices are sent home and a copy maintained on file along with the agenda and sign in sheet for the meeting. Outreach is logged in ATS and school systems. Copies of letters are scanned and maintained in the Principal's electronic files as a tertiary backup. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Aside from the PTA and School Leadership Team, workshops and programs are offered to ELL parents. Workshops and programs are offered in English and Spanish by school staff. For parents who speak West African dialects, one parent representative will offer to interpret. The parent coordinator actively seeks out workshops for parents to support health and wellness such as offerings from Healthplex. The SLT sponsors school events that engage parents and students in learning opportunities and school involvement activities. One of the SLT’s biggest sponsored event is the annual Education Fair. This event allows parents, students and staff to engage in discussion, celebrations and performances that occur at PS 88. It is the highlight of the school year. When school staff present parent workshops such as exploring their child's reading level or curriculum workshops, we have high level of parent participation especially from our parents whose child/children are identified as an ELL. The parent coordinator makes outreach to parents to participate in workshops and parent leadership opportunities. The parent coordinator works with administrators to ensure all constituencies are represented. Currently, our PTA cabinet consists of two parents of ELLs and two of our parent volunteers have children identified as ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 66  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: For the past two years, a teacher initiated a student choir for students in grades 2 and 3. Students identified are both non ELLs and ELLs. This provides an additional opportunity to build language through the arts and has been quite an exciting experience for our students to perform for school wide events. 2018-19 CEP 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Melinda Hyer, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 88 Sidney Silverstein Littl School DBN: 09X088 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Melinda Hyer Title Principal Priscilla Centeno Assistant Principal Shaniqua Santos Parent Coordinator Henri Lenogue-Ford ENL/Bilingual Teacher Evelyng Flores Parent N/A due to budget Teacher/Subject Area N/A due to budget Teacher/Subject Area Marisa Danish N/A due to budget Coach Coach N/A due to Budget School Counselor Leticia Rodriguez Rosario Sabrina Cruz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X088 School Name: PS 88 Superintendent: Leticia Rodrigu The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Priscilla Centeno Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. For all new admissions to our school, we follow the Chancellor’s Regulations. The needs for written translation and oral interpretation at PS 88 were assessed through the Home Language Survey to determine the predominant languages spoken by our parent population. We look at our demographic data in September using ATS reports such as the RSDS to identify languages spoken in the school. In house, we provide English, Spanish and French. For West African dialects, we have a community member who provides interpretation services when available. School staff also uses the Language Line which provides over the phone interpretations. ATS also collects oral and written preferred languages. Informally we review student emergency contact cards and teacher conversations and meetings will parents provide the school with information on how best to communicate with our families. 2018-19 CEP 70  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Soninke Bambara Arabic French 103 99 4 1 2 1 49.05 47.14 1.90 0.48 0.95 0.48 104 98 4 1 2 1 49.52 46.67 1.90 0.48 0.95 0.48 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent Manual September (first day of new school year or when student registers) Monthly Parent Calendar 1 to 2 days before start of new month Monthly Attendance Letter (specific to students with excessive absences/lateness Distributed monthly, within five days of new month How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated in house and distributed to parents first day of school or upon registration. Additional notices relevant to the manual are translated in French and Arabic if made available by DOE. Soninke and Bambara are not written languages. Notices translated in house and prepared in time to distribute to parents as noted. Soninke and Bambara are not written languages. Notices translated in house and prepared in time to distribute to parents as noted. Soninke and 2018-19 CEP 71  Promotion in Doubt November Parent/Teacher Conferences, January when date is determined by DOE Bambara are not written languages. Notices translated in house and prepared in time to distribute to parents as noted. DOE does not provide translations for Soninke and Bambara as they are not written languages. Notices translated in house and prepared in time to distribute to parents as noted. Soninke and Bambara are not written languages. Notices translated in house and prepared in time to distribute to parents as noted. Soninke and Bambara are not written languages. Parent / Teacher Conferences PTA Notices Title 1 Meetings Testing Information School Workshops School Events DOE Policies (I.e. Safety/Discipline/Respect for All, etc) Published and distributed on monthly calendar sent home 1 to 2 days before new month, notices sent home 10 days prior and five days prior to date PTA notice distributed ten days prior to meeting, Published and distributed on monthly calendar sent home 1 to 2 days before new month Published and distributed on monthly calendar sent home 1 to 2 days before new month, notices sent home 10 days prior and five days prior to date of meeting Notices translated in house and prepared in time to distribute to parents as noted. Soninke and Bambara are not written languages. Published and distributed on monthly calendar sent home 1 to 2 days before new month, notices sent home 10 days prior testing date and within five days before testing date Notices translated in house and prepared in time to distribute to parents as noted. NYSED and NYCDOE letters are distributed in the languages that are provided. Soninke and Bambara are not written languages. Published and distributed on monthly calendar sent home 1 to 2 days before new month, notices sent home 10 days prior testing date and within five days before workshop Notices translated in house and prepared in time to distribute to parents as noted. Soninke and Bambara are not written languages. Published and distributed on monthly calendar sent home 1 to 2 days before new month, notices sent home 10 days prior testing date and within five days before event Notices translated in house and prepared in time to distribute to parents as noted. Soninke and Bambara are not written languages. Published and distributed as per DOE directives, notices are sent home as dated on letters Translated and sent home based on availability on DOE website 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 72  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Monthly PTA Meetings & Business Published and distributed on monthly calendar sent home 1 to 2 days before new month, notices sent home 10 days prior meeting date, reminder notice sent home within five days of meeting Title 1 Meeting Published and distributed on monthly calendar sent home 1 to 2 days before new month, notices sent home 10 days prior meeting date, reminder notice sent home within five days of meeting School Workshops Published and distributed on monthly calendar sent home 1 to 2 days before new month, notices sent home 10 days prior meeting date, reminder notice sent home within five days of workshop School Events (Meet the Teacher, Kindergarten Orientation, Education Fair, etc.) Published and distributed on monthly calendar sent home 1 to 2 days before new month, notices sent home 10 days prior meeting date, reminder notice sent home within five days of school even interpretation service(s)?   School staff provide interpretation in Spanish and French School utilizes the Language Line an over-the-phone interpretation service provided by the NYCDOE for languages not available at the school  Meeting notices are translated in house   School staff provide interpretation in Spanish and French School utilizes the Language Line an over-the-phone interpretation service provided by the NYCDOE for languages not available at the school  Meeting notices are translated in house    School staff provide interpretation in Spanish and French School utilizes the Language Line an over-the-phone interpretation service provided by the NYCDOE for languages not available at the school If funds are available, a contracted vendor for workshops  Meeting notices are translated in house   School staff provide interpretation in Spanish and French School utilizes the Language Line an over-the-phone interpretation service provided by the NYCDOE for languages not available at the school  Contracted vendors for SAT 2018-19 CEP 73 meetings  Parent/Teacher Conferences (Promotion in Doubt Published and distributed on monthly calendar sent home 1 to 2 days before new month, notices sent home 10 days prior meeting date, reminder notice sent home within five days of conferences  Meeting notices are translated in house   School staff provide interpretation in Spanish and French School utilizes the Language Line an over-the-phone interpretation service provided by the NYCDOE for languages not available at the school  Meeting notices are translated in house  Promotion in Doubt translated generic letters are provided by the NYCDOE 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Outreach can be conducted in house by staff for Spanish and French. Office staff speak both English and Spanish. The NYCDOE provides the Language Line, an over-the-phone interpretation service in over 200 languages. This free service is reliable and frequently used by parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In September, all staff participate in opening school policy and procedure review. Prior to the four parent engagement events and promotion in doubt meetings, teachers are provided resources for translation and interpretation. Signs are posted throughout the building. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the beginning of the school year, each parent was provided with written notification of their rights regarding interpretation and translation services in the appropriate language. All parents in need of language assistance can 2018-19 CEP 74  make requests in the school’s main office. At the main school entrance is the DOE Interpretation sign that tells parents who to contact in the school for interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gain feedback from parents, we use the NYC School Survey and information gathered from monthly PTA Meetings. Parent leadership includes parents from differing cultures and backgrounds which provides us with a representation of the school. Through participation as volunteers and as parent leaders they communicate with school staff including the parent coordinator to support the school. 2018-19 CEP 75 
