2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X089 School Name: P.S. 089 BRONX Principal: RALPH MARTINEZ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 89-The Williamsbridge School 11X089 School Number (DBN): 321100010089 Pre-K - 8 980 Mace Avenue Bronx, NY 10469 718 653-0835 Phone Number: 718 231-2863 Fax: Ralph Martinez rmartin72@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ralph Martinez Robert Peduzzi Dawn O'Donnell DaraOhle Kathy Burgos Frank Miranda Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information MeishaRoss Porter Superintendent: 2750 Throop Avenue Bronx, NY Mross@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 519-2620 Phone Number: 718 517-2626 Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 ZeregaAve., Bronx, NY 10462 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ralph Martinez Robert Peduzzi JoshlynPink Annette Alvarado TanikyaFeemster Cherisse Roberson Eva (Maggie) Ortiz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Caridad(Carrie)LoPresti AngelaPoulimas MariaFinelli Christine Gallo KathyBurgos Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ ParentCoordinator Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Building relationships, one student at a time, and empowering them to make a global impact. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 89 ~ The Williamsbridge School is located in Pelham Parkway in the Northeast section of the Bronx adjacent to the Pelham Parkway Housing Complex. With a diverse population of 1537, the school services students in grades Pre-K - 8. The school population comprises of 54% Hispanic, 20% Black, 15% White, 9% Asian, <1% Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander, <1% Multi-Racial, and <1% American Indian. P.S. 89's Shared Vision: The P.S. 89 school community believes in creating 21st century student-centered classrooms where students can thrive. Our goal is to build a strong foundation that will allow students to participate in a risk-free environment and apply their real-world experiences to achieve their greatest academic potential. We will monitor our students’ progress towards meeting high expectations and adjust instruction accordingly. Along with all constituencies, we will strive to build upon our students’ strengths and enable them to develop their self-esteem, curiosity, and a love of learning. Every partnership and collaboration the school has engaged in was initiated with the idea of developing skills that will move our students towards college and career readiness in the 21 st Century. Some of our partnerships include: 1. Big Picture Learning - The Big Picture Learning model believes in educating one student at a time. In addition, we believe that innovative, personalized learning environments that work in tandem with the real world of their greater community will best serve our children. 2. Learning Partners Program -The Learning Partners Program develops and promotes inter-school collaborative learning between sets of host schools and partner schools. These partnerships will strengthen all schools involved and produce strong practices to share system-wide. 3. Dream Program- The DREAM program was introduced by the Office of Equity and Access through the Department of Education. The program has a competitive selection process in which the students must meet in order to be enrolled in the program. If selected, the student will enter a 22-month extracurricular program of rigorous coursework designed to assist eligible NYC public school students in preparing for the Specialized High Schools Admissions Test (SHSAT). DREAM - SHSI coursework emphasizes verbal and math skills, problem-solving, critical analysis, time management, and test-taking strategies specific to the SHSAT. 4. Education Through Music: Through this collaboration, students in Pre-K-8 develop basic music skills. Students perform twice a year while developing self-esteem and an appreciation for music as an art form. The collaboration helps the school sustain the music program beyond the partnership. 5. Einstein Student Organizations Partnership P.S. 89 Garden: In partnership with the BODY organization (Bronx, Obesity, Diabetes and You- Albert Einstein Hospital), our school garden has been created. Planting began in Spring 2015, continued in Spring 2016, and and will continue this year in the Spring of 2017 with grades K - 5. Medical students from Einstein will continue to work collaboratively with the school in the development of the GROW NYC Grant to ensure that we can continue to maintain the garden. The garden will continue to be maintained and beautified through our Art Department. Insect homes have been created by students and mosaics and a banner will be added. Our summer enrichment programs utilized the vegetables to make healthy snacks for the students. We will continue to do outreach to organizations to work with us to 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  utilize the garden vegetables and promote awareness for health and wellness and nutrition. Project Start: Medical student organization has student volunteers come in once a week and work with 2 classes on grade K, 1 & 2. They lead the children in hands-on science exploratory activities. The medical students consult with teachers to ensure that they are aligned with the science scope and sequence. 6. Community of Learners Cohort: The Community of Learners Cohort is a professional collaboration among schools created to provide opportunities for peer learning. Teachers and leaders from P.S. 89, P.S. 105, and P.S. 108 will engage in professional development and inter-visitations that include observations and feedback on best practices and areas for next steps. Each visit to a partner school is aligned to the school-wide goals and instructional focus, which includes designing coherent instruction (1e), questioning and discussion (3b), engaging students in learning (3c), and using assessment in instruction (3d). Information is turn-keyed to staff after visits. 7. Generation Ready: Curriculum Development 8. National Training Network: The mission of NTM is to build a nation of mathematically sound thinkers who have deep conceptual understanding through the provision of high quality math professional development to educators. 9. ELL After School and Saturday School Program - 10. Computer Science for All 11. Algebra for All 12. Urban Advantage 13. Middle School Quality Initiative 14. Teaching Fellows Program 15. Christodora Science Camp Our Teacher Teams and Professional Learning Communities are strong and continue to grow. A continued effort to ensure Teacher teams meet a minimum of twice a week in grades K-2 and once per week in grades 3-8 with several teams meeting unofficially during prep/lunch periods and after school.  Common planning time, built into each teacher’s schedule, affords teams opportunities to:  Create, or adjust pacing calendars  Analyze the curriculum to make instructional adjustments considering special populations  Plan lessons  Develop knowledge of content and resources  Analyze data for the purpose of differentiation  Creating rigorous tasks  Analyze tasks and define gaps across the grade  Monitor progress through the use of formative assessments (checklists, observations, conferring notes  Sharing best practices and resources for instruction 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. English Language Learners The amount of recent immigrants who do not speak English has increased substantially in recent years and the majority of these students are SIFE and need multiple scaffolds and support to succeed. Our newly arrived ELLs benefit from small group instruction, English immersion, and an increase in instructional time. They will be invited to attend After-school Program and the Saturday ELL Program. Our Long-Term ELLs are students in grades three through eight who have four our more years of ESL services. We have found that these students need to improve their reading comprehension and writing skills. Many of these students also need to be exposed to more academic conversations. As a result, we have created an after-school program that uses the independent reading program called Reading Plus. This program is extremely appropriate for long term ells and students who are not making gains annually on the NYSESLAT and other state exams. Long Term ELLs are also invited to our Saturday ELL Explorations Program. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  Our final targeted group is our ELLs with IEPS in all grade levels. The majority of our students in this subgroup benefit from small group instruction, hands on activities, and team teaching settings. We created our Saturday ELL Explorations Program with this group in mind. The students are encouraged to participate in theatrical programs where they are encouraged to perform, create art, and express themselves in multiple ways. Our use of the arts to increase a love of learning and expression has been extremely successful and the students have shown substantial growth in their test results. During the past school year, our school focused on implementing CCLS aligned ELA and Math curricula across grades K -8. Teacher teams worked diligently to create Understanding by Design (UBD) units of study in ELA and math. Teachers made adjustments to the new curricula to ensure that it included intentional teaching for all students, including ELLs and SWDs had access to the new, rigorous material. Arts, technology and science teachers worked with grade teams to ensure that they included topics and strategies introduced in ELA or Math. Teams utilized a protocol to make adjustments to units and lesson plans based on information garnered from pre-unit assessments, formative assessments, and summative assessment tools. Units and lessons were adjusted based on grade and class assessment data. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework - Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Curriculum Development - School wide units of study aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards were created using the Understanding by Design framework. Subgroup ELL Student Progress - 85 % of our students progressed at least one level on the NYSESLAT exam. Framework - Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Assessment in Instruction - The school instructional focused was revamped and is now focused on developing a school wide progress monitoring system which includes 2-3 school wide aligned assessment practices. P.S. 89's Instructional Focus for the 2018 - 2019 school year: If we design and utilize task specific rubrics to provide students with ongoing opportunities for self/peer assessment, targeted feedback, and targeted instruction then this will lead to increased. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. Continue curriculum development, alignment and adjustments across the grades. Ensure that planning is intentional and targeted to meet the needs of all students. Create and monitor school-wide aligned assessment practices. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X089 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1548 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 74 75 39 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 78 75 41 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 76.0% % Reduced Lunch 20.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 54.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 15.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.09 0% 26% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 34.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO NO NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 172 175 13 91.2% 0.5% 17.1% 18.9% 9.2% 1.6% 8 17% 3.5 29.1% 79% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO NO N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School strength: 3.3 Based on the 2016-2017 Quality Review report, the area of focus for our school was 1.2 develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework fro teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that students produce meaningful work products. Curriculum Development - We hired specialists in curriculum development to support teachers in creating CCLS aligned units of study and provided teachers with professional development focused on intentional teaching practices including the implementation of the Gradual Release of Responsibility model. In the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to work on curriculum adjustments and pedagogical practices that will support all learners. Area of Focus: 3.5 Based on the 2016-2017 Quality Review report, an area of focus for our school was 2.2. Use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  3.5 DTSDE Findings: The school has developed a data-oriented culture; however, the school leaders have not connected comprehensive data analysis to strategic action planning in order to improve student achievement. Although the school collects data from multiple sources, school-wide progress monitoring of data and the lack of evaluation progress toward SCEP goals limit the leaders' ability to evaluate school performance and student achievement as they relate to SCEP goals. This situation also impedes data-driven strategic action-planning. NYS ELA Assessment Data: Results on the 2018 ELA State Assessment indicate 34% of all students tested scored either a Level 3 or Level 4. 5% of our ELL students reached proficicency and 6 % of Students with Disabilities scored proficiency on the NYS ELA State Exam. For 2018-2019 our instructional focus is: If we design and implement school-wide assessment practices then it will lead to increased student proficiency on Common Core Learning Standards as measured by performance tasks and summative assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By Spring 2019, teacher teams will develop, adjust and modify CCLS aligned curriculum units which will result in a three percent increase of ELA proficiency levels (3 & 4) for students in` grades 3 – 8 from 34% to 37% as measured by the NYS ELA Exam. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Curriculum development aligned to CCLS standards utilizing the Understanding by Design Framework with scaffolds and supports for ELLs and SWDs. Teachers Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Utilize data to make adjustments to curricular units and lesson plans. Teachers, Administrators Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teacher teams will utilize assessments to gather information about student learning and inform revision of instructional units, including lessons and tasks through the use of professional learning cycles Teachers Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Implement Active Reading and Open Response Initiative across all content areas to support the development of student writing Self- contained SpEd classes - Implementation of Wilson’s intervention programs such as Just Words and Fundations Teachers, Students Special Education Teachers; Special Education Students Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators, Coaches, Data Specialist, Consultants Administrators, Coaches, Data Specialist, Consultants Administrators, Coaches, Data Specialist, Consultants Administrators, Coaches, Consultants Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Coaches, Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Teachers communicate with parents on Tuesday afternoons during Family Engagement Time about their child's progress on formative and summative assessment practices. 2. Family Literacy Night will include an overview of CCLS and units of study. (Administrators, Coaches and Teachers will facilitate) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  3. Parent Newsletter will be distributed focused on the Active Reading and Open Response Initiative. This will include strategies for families to support student writing development at home. (Administrators, Coaches, and Teachers) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Consultants, Data Specialist, Coaches Instructional Resources: School-wide data, Understanding by Design Framework, Expeditionary Learning Curriculum with Modifications Schedule Adjustment: Additional common planning time for grades teams, professional learning cohorts, and vertical team Per Session: Data Specialist, Instructional Cabinet, Teacher Teams, Vertical Team, Partnerships: Learning Partners Program Partnership Grades 6 - 8, Community of Learners K - 5 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 30% of students will make performance gains compared to September DRP administration data. By February 2019, 50% of students will increase at least one reading level as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Assessment System. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Pre and Post Benchmark Assessments in ELA Mid Point Benchmark - January 2019: ELA Simulation Degrees of Reading Power Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x X x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In terms of the Capacity Framework (Supportive Environment)/Tenet 5, P.S. 89 has:   Implementation of the Leadership Program, ELLA Program for the ELLs, NIDC After School Program to promote social and emotional developmental health, including advisory, peer mediation, behavior improvement plans, student reward programs and community partnerships, in order to give every learner including our ELLs and SWDs to participate. Implemented capacity building in teachers includes training through Big Picture and PBIS on supporting social and emotional development health, and the implementation of a peer mediation process. The Crisis Intervention Team including the Guidance Counselors provide additional support for students.  Re-programmed the school to schedule targeted instruction to meet the social. emotional and academic aspect of every student. NIDC is supporting the school to provide 6th graders Expanded Day which provides enrichment for our students. 5.3 Areas for Improvement Based on the results of the school's PBIS self-assessment survey, 67% of the staff indicated the PBIS should be a priority in the school-wide improvement efforts to reduce low level infractions and the levels of suspensions. In addition, 39% 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  indicated that PBIS is partially implemented in the classroom and 19% indicated it is not. In order for PBIS to be consistent school-wide, teachers need to be provided with a curriculum that will reinforce character education. Professional development will be provided to give the staff strategies on dealing with low to high level infractions and creating a behavior intervention plan for repeated offenders. Based on the data collected from our Online Occurance Report System, we will monitor the impact the PBIS has had on the student population. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, level three infractions will decrease from 23% to 20% as measured by the Online Occurrence Reporting System through the continued implementation of the Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports Program. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The school will utilize data to implement and evaluate a school-wide PBIS program to address the social and emotional developmental needs of students and maximize academic and social success. Students Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Guidance counselors, Teachers Students will participate in a school-wide anti-bullying initiative. Guidance counselors will introduce the program in assemblies and class workshops. Students will sign an anti-bullying pledge. Students Administrators, Deans Sept. 2018 – October 2018 Guidance counselors, Teachers, Administrators, Dean January 2019 - February 2019 June 2019 Sept 2018 -June 2019 At-risk students, classes Guidance Counselors Families of Students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Counselors Students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Guidance counselors, Teachers Administrators, Deans School guidance counselors will utilize data from OORS and anecdotal records from classroom teachers, and ILog (ATS) to select classes and small groups of students to present workshops and activities on social emotional learning during advisory periods. Workshop themes will include: managing emotions, self-awareness, responsible decision making, forming positive relationships, showing understanding and empathy. The guidance counselors will work with the Crisis Intervention Team and the Parent Coordinator to provide workshops on Bullying Awareness, PBIS along with monthly PBIS Parent Newsletters, Parenting Skills, Staying Connected with your Adolescent, Responding to your Child in Crisis and Effective Discipline Strategies. During Respect For All Week, guidance counselors, school psychologists, social workers and the crisis intervention teachers will provide school-wide lessons on Diversity, Bias-Based Harassment and Intimidation and Bullying. Our school has a zero tolerance policy. Families and students will be provided with Respect for All informational packets. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22 Tier 2 students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Guidance counselors, Teachers Administrators, Deans By the end of January 2019, the PBIS team will analyze data from OORS and our own in-house Crisis Intervention Referral Forms to determine which students are in need of more intense behavioral interventions. These students will be considered Tier II students within PBIS and will be assigned a PBIS Coach for check-ins to meet with daily to set and discuss weekly behavioral goals. These students will also utilize a behavior tracking chart in which their teachers will rate their behavior for each period. The chart will be sent home daily and parents will be encouraged to discuss their child's rating and sign the sheet. Every sheet should be returned to the PBIS coach the following school day. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Informational letters in multiple languages will be sent home explaining Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) and how it is implemented at P.S. 89. Workshops will be held for families focused on PBIS and strategies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: PBIS Team, Crisis Intervention Team, Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselors Instructional Resurces: Schoolwide OORs data reports, PBIS Matrix, Surveys, Powerpoints Schedule Adjustments: Teacher coverages for PBIS team to conduct PBIS incentive events, scheudle times for PBIS team to meet at least twice a month. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To monitor the progress of PBIS implementation we will review the data of level 3 infractions on OORs and compare the results to last year's data. The safety committee and the pbis team will meet once a month to analyze the data and track percentage of level 3 infractions to analyze effectiveness of PBIS implementation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  OORs results will indicate less than 10% Level 3 infractions in January 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In terms of the Capacity Framework – Collaborative Teachers/Tenet 4, school strengths in this area include,  Common planning periods are embedded within teacher programs so teams have a regular opportunity to develop CCLS aligned units and lesson plans. During planning sessions teachers utilize assessment data to identify students needs, develop instructional goals, and share instructional strategies to address the goals and needs identified.  Teachers and students have collaboratively developed a shared vision for classrooms.  The school utlilizes Google Drive, a cloud based platform, for gathering data and sharing electronic documents. This in turn is used for adjustment of curriculum and instructional practice. Areas for Improvement:  Instructional plans should always be differentiated in a manner that allows for all students to have access to the content.  Teachers must be able to collaboratively adjust and modify curriculum in order to meet the needs of various learners.  Teachers must implement flexible grouping based on criteria that has been strategically aligned through the analysis of student data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25   Teachers must correlate learning activities that are scaffolded to meet the student needs through multiple entry points as well as incorporate active student discussions and high levels of questioning and discussion that promote student thinking. DTSDE Findings 4.2: While visiting classrooms, the IIT noted limited use use of Higher order questions as well as low student engagement. While students were in groups, the group were based solely on reading levels. Activities and tasks were not differentiated or scaffolded to provide multiple entry points to meet student needs. The implementation of instructional plans does not always include differentiation, therefore students do not consistently have opportunities to experience instruction that promotes high levels of student engagement and inquiry. 4.3: Despite the fact that teacher teams have developed units of study and lesson plans, during classroom visits teachers did not fully implement plans as designed. Although plans indicated that students would be engaged in a variety of activities the IIT found that students were often engaged in the same activity. Although students were physically grouped, they often worked independently within their group. There was no differentiation of assignments. The CCLS aligned lessons and daily instruction does not include the implementation of differentiated instruction, or ensue multiple entry points for all students. 4.4 Each classroom developed a shared vision and Code of Collaboration that includes student voice on behavioral expectations. However a review of the OORS system indicated that between September 2012 and February 2013, 113 behavioral incidents were reported. The majority of the incidents took place in classrooms despite the creation of Code of Collaboration. During classroom visits the IIT found that students called out answers in many classrooms. Most lesson plans reviewed included questioning strategies, however classroom visits noted missed opportunities by teachers to use questioning strategies to promote thinking and problem solving. Most questions required a one-word response. Instruction was not differentiated to support student strengths or accommodate individual needs. 4.5 The school has a variety of data sources available to teacher teams to use, develop and adjust instruction, however the school does not use data to determine trends of student progress, especially for at-risk students. Lesson plans did not include specific interventions for students based on data analysis for individual students. A review of rubrics used to evaluate student work were found to be inconsistently applied and did not include components to communicate individual feedback to students on performance, progress or next steps for improvement. A comprehensive system of data collection, analysis and monitoring is needed to address student academic needs and adjust lessons. NYS Math Assessment Data: Results on the 2018 Math State Assessment indicate that 29% of all students tested scored Level 3 or Level 4. In terms of our ELLs, 8% scored at Level 3 or Level 4. Students with Disabilities faired the worst with 7% achieving Level 3 or Level 4. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By Spring 2019, teacher teams will develop, adjust and modify CCLS aligned curriculum units which will result in a three percent increase of Math proficiency levels (3 & 4) for students in grades 3 – 8 from 29% to 32% as measured by the NYS Math Exam. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) In order to refine the teacher team meetings to ensure goal setting and strategic planning with a focus on student outcomes, implementation of a Professional Learning Team Cycle protocol will be utilized by every teacher facilitator for planning of PLC cycles. Teacher teams will utilize protocols to analyze data and make adjustments to units and lessons to meet the needs of all students. During common planning periods, teachers work as a team to analyze formative and summative assessment data in order to create lessons and activities that provide access to all students aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Teacher teams Teacher teams Designate a full time school based math coach that will support teachers utilizing 6 to 8 week cycles of support in which she will model, co-teach, co-plan, provide resources and work in partnership with the school leaders. Math department Math Consultant from National Training Network will provide coaching and feedback to teachers to improve mathematical practices. Teachers September 2017 - June 2018 Supervisors, coaches, teachers as facilitators of the team meetings. September 2017 – June 2018 (twice weekly GrK-4, weekly grades PreK, 5-8) September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 June 2018 Supervisors, coaches, and teachers as facilitators of the team meetings. Supervisors NTM Consultant and administrators Implementation of school wide mathematical problem solving method (SOLVE) Teachers NTM Consultant, Math September 2018 - June 2019 Coach, Supervisors, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Math-A-Mats professional development will be provide four times throughout the 18-19 school year. The mats provide a detailed description of the common core learning standards for each grade level. Teams of teachers created math syllabi for parents which will be introduced at Meet the Teacher Night in September and sent home 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  to parents. Administrators, Coaches and Lead Teachers will be the key personnel responsible for the implementation and oversight of the promotion of teacher-parent collaboration in order to support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: 3 Consultants to support professional learning including: 1 Educational Consultant to build teacher capacity with a focus on effective teaching strategies and intentional planning guided by the CCLS, Instructional Shifts, and the UBD model 1 NTN Consultant to build mathematical content knowledge and pedagogy Instructional Resources: School-wide data, Understanding by Design Framework, Expeditionary Learning Curriculum with Modifications Schedule Adjustment: Additional common planning time for grades teams, professional learning cohorts, and vertical team Per Session: Data Specialist, Instructional Cabinet, Teacher Teams, Vertical Team, Partnerships: Learning Partners Program Partnership Grades 6 - 8, Community of Learners K - 5 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At least 50% of students will score 70% or higher on the January Math Quarterly Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Math Quarterly Assessments will be utilized to monitor the progress of students. iXL online platform Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our strengths in this area include: Stakeholders within the school community developed the school vision statement, and SCEP collaboratively.   Data is analyzed to set instructional outcomes that will promote relevant situations and persevere through rigorous tasks. Strategies are provided for all students to achieve success.  Administrative team meetings are designed to analyze data from formative and summative assessments used throughout the year to make informed decisions on instructional practices that will support our needs assessments, school-wide goals and instructional focus.  Administrators engage in norming and callibration processes to ensure that observations are aligned to the instructional focus  Administrators meet weekly to analyze teacher observations to identify trends and next steps for schoolwide instructional practices. 2.5 Areas for Improvement 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  School leaders must develop a system that includes targeted written feedback, targeted professional development and follow-up after professional learning activities. Providing on-going support for teachers who are not implementing the instructional practices to support the data results and our instructional focus.  Creating transparency amongst all stakeholders when recieving feedback from outside evaluators Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase (from 73% to 78%) in the percentage of teachers that receive an effective or highly effective rating in 3D as a result of professional learning and targeted coaching in using formative assessments and providing effective feedback to students as measured by the end of year summative ratings in Advance. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators and coaches will align cycles of support beginning with advance observations, feedback, co-planning, co-teaching, debriefing, non-evaluative observations, feedback, and next steps for a gradual release of support. Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Consultants, and coaches There will be times stamps for follow through for implementation of next steps. Professional development activities including workshops, and inter-visitations will provide teachers with the tools needed to: Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Consultants, and coaches ● Enhance assessment practices ● Create differentiated lessons with multiple entry points and interventions for ELLs and SWDs. ● Utilize formative assessments to form flexible groups based on targeted student needs. ● Utilize writing rubrics across all grades and disciplines to create a cohesive student assessment monitoring system. The efficacy of the professional development activities will be evaluated utilizing targeted observations, teacher reflections, and conferring with teachers. Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Consultants, and coaches Teachers will receive written and verbal feedback from observations and snapshots (walk-throughs). Follow-up sessions will occur based on targeted observations. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Handbook that includes a syllabus of curriculum Parent Workshops on ways to help their child at home 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Consultants, Administrators. Teachers, Per Diem teachers Instructional Resources: Formative Assessment Checklist, Developing pre and post assessements for units of study, Student self and peer assessment opprotunities are developed throughout the units ; Student Portfolios with self reflections Schedule Adjustments: Per Diem teachers needed to provide opportunities for teachers to meet and plan with consultants and to visit other classrooms with effective assessment practices. Time is needed for a debrief session among host classroom teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 75% of teachers will receive an effective or highly effective rating in 3D (Using Assessment in Instruction) as measured by the Advance Teacher Evaluation System. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the area of Strong Family-Community Ties, the school’s strengths lie in the following areas: ● 94% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. (Q1d) ● 95% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h) These results are from the Parent Survey results from 2017-2018 school year. 6.5 Areas for Improvement  Only 57% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. (Q4a)  Only 80% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. (Q1b) These results are from the Parent Survey results from 2017-2018 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 9% increase (from 57% to 66%) in the percent of families who will agree or strongly agree that they have had the opportunity to volunteer to support the school as measured by the results of question 4a on the 2019 NYC Parent Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Event 1: Read to your child's class (volunteer based event) Parents will be invited to come into the classroom to read to their child. Parents who speak all languages will be encouraged to read to the class. If necessary, translators will be provided. Parents of students in grades pre-k through 4. A date will be set in October 2018 Event 2: Watch your child learn (observe instruction) All parents will be invited to come into the classroom and watch their child learn. Teachers and students will be able to show the guardians their classroom environment and some different routines and lessons. Guardians and students in grades Pre K - 8. A date will be set in November 2018 Event 3: Watch your child present (observe instruction) Parents/Guardians A date will Students will present their slide show/project that they created in their advisory class. Event 4: Share your culture day. (volunteer based) Parents will be invited to come in and present an interesting fact, video, story, food, clothing, dance, or type of music from their culture. Children will be able to learn about each others' cultures from their families. be set in November 2018 Parents/Guardians and students in grades k through 8. A date will be set in December 2018 Event 5: Cultural Performance(observe insturction) Parents/Guardians will be invited, PTA, Kathy Burgos, Parent Coordinator, Peer Collaborative Teachers, classroom teachers and administration Kathy Burgos, Parent Coordinator, Peer Collaborative Teachers, classroom teachers and administration Administrators, Parent coordinator, Peer Collaborative Teachers, and classroom teachers. PTA, ELL Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Peer Collaborative Teachers, classroom teachers, and administration. Administrators, Parent coordinator, Peer Collaborative Teachers, PTA, and ELL Team. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  Parents will be invited to watch the students perform dances, songs, poems, and art from various cultures. students will be presenting. A date will be set in March 2018 Administrators, Parent coordinator, Peer Collaborative Teachers, PTA, and ELL Team. Event 6: Watch your child learn (observe instruction) All parents will be invited to come into the classroom and watch their child learn. Teachers and students will be able to show the guardians their classroom environment and some different routines and lessons. Guardians and students in grades Pre K - 8. A date will be set in May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Urban Advantage Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● DOE Translator for written communication ● Per Session for in-house translators ● Per session for teachers who work with students on culture performances during after school programs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 60% of families will agree or strongly agree that they have had the opportunity to volunteer to support the school as measured by a school created parent survey Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. midpoint questionnaire, attendance logs, NYC School Survey, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) targeted small group instruction Small group (5) During school hours and after school guided instruction ScienceState Exam, if applicable reciprocal teaching State ELA Assessments 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38 Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Classroom observations, State ELA Assessments, if applicable, parent referral Mathematics Classroom observations, State MathAssessments, if applicable, parent referral Science Classroom observations, guided instruction reciprocal teaching ST Math, Buzz Math and Braining (Online Program) Reciprocal Teaching targeted small group instruction guided instruction targeted small group instruction One to one conferencing Mainstreaming Advisories Small group (5) One to one conferencing Mainstreaming Advisories Small group (5) One to one conferencing Saturday Academy During school hours and after school Saturday Academy During school hours and after school Project-based learning  Social Studies Classroom observations, targeted small group instruction Small group (5) During school hours and after school One to one conferencing One on one conferencing Anti-bullying Initiative Project-based learning Pull-out, push-in sessions guided instruction CommonAssessments State ELA Assessments Attendance Records (ATS) reciprocal teaching Small group guidance Whole class intervention w/ guidance team School-wide PBIS OORS reports Common Assessments Referral from Crisis Intervention Team Parental input Student Portfolios At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 11 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Parent Coordinator allocations include providing students with backpacks and child necessities. Provide students with transportation - bus or metro cards (if applicable) Free meals Counseling Services Principal will work with the STH school based liaison to ensure that the STH component of the School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan is completed and implemented with a high degree of quality. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. School administrators work with the Department of Human Resources to ensure that all teachers are highly qualified. Partnerships are formed with local colleges to identify new staff and administrators attend hiring fairs sponsored by the DOE. The following outlines the strategies used by staff in support of hiring and retaining highly qualified teachers: ● Hiring Committee is established, including administrators, teachers and coaches ● The hiring committee develops questions and scenarios specific to the position open ● Once a new teacher is hired a mentor is assigned to support the teacher ● New hires are invited to join professional development sessions on a bi- basis weekly New Teacher Meetings led by Instructional Coaches ● Teachers are assigned to teacher teams to collaborate with colleagues ● Supervisors provide inter-visitation schedules for new teachers to seek best practices ● Internal and external professional development opportunities are offered to staff including a Summer Institute ● Tenure preparation sessions with the Principal are offered 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The strategies and activities listed below have been put in place to ensure that staff receives high quality professional development to improve instruction, thus enabling our students to meet the Common Core Learning Standards: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  ● Supervisors conduct observations and provide ongoing feedback aligned with the Danielson Rubric ● Supervisors in collaboration with teachers develop individual professional development plans for teachers ● Supervisory staff meet individually with teachers during Initial Planning Conference to review student data and develop plans for improving both instruction and student achievement. Check-in will occur mid-year(February) and hold End-of-the-Year Summative meetings to see if teachers successfully implemented their action plans/goals. ● Teacher teams are scheduled for common planning periods to design and adjust curriculum in alignment with CCLS. ● In-house and Borough Field Support Center professional development activities are scheduled year-round to support teachers and para-professionals ● Inter-visitations are scheduled so teachers can observe best practices within the school and at other schools. ● School staff members are trained in the Reading Rescue Program to accelerate the reading levels of targeted first grade students ● Teacher teams adjust units and lessons on an ongoing basis to meet the needs of ELLs and SWDs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-K teachers work collaboratively with kindergarten teachers throughout the year. Weekly Primary Team (Pre-K – 1) professional development activities permit teachers to be trained together while having opportunities to discuss curriculum and student needs. Pre-K teachers are scheduled for inter-visitations in kindergarten classrooms so they have an opportunity to prepare their students for the transition to kindergarten. Monthly parent workshops focus on skills students will need upon entering kindergarten. These hands-on workshops provide parents with CCLS aligned activities they can make/do at home to strengthen foundational skills. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  The pre-k social worker, assigned to the school weekly, provides parents with information regarding academic and social expectations for kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams work collaboratively to develop formative and summative assessment instruments. Teachers on the MOSL Team determine appropriate school-wide measures. All staff members have received professional development on norming, utilizing data from assessments to drive instruction and group students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column B Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 $16,979.00 $182,489.00 $82,384.00 $0 $18,832.00 $8,898,253.00 X X X X X X Section Reference(s) 5A, 5C 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P. S. 89, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, Title I Parent Committee, and Academic Parent Teacher Teams as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 89 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and workshops to help parents work with their children at home to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress during Parent Engagement time (Every Tuesday); ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, student data, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger relationships between parents and other members of our school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality P.S. 89’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. The school will maintain this information. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator, Kathy Burgos, or a dedicated staff person will provide workshops for families based on the assessed needs of families of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all families. Ms. Burgos will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home. ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, NYC School Guide Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 20 th of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  ● Parent-Teacher Home Visit Program will contiue i the 2018 - 2019 school year to build strong home-school partnerships. ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help also will be reinforced in the Academic Parent Teacher Team; ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● hosting events to support, men asserting leadership in education for their children. parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing a school website with a parent corner and a schoolwide events calendar schedule to keep parents informed about school activities. ● provide parents with log in information to access NYC Schools to stay informed of their child's attendance and state exam score information. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 89 – The Williamsbridge School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 20 th of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We have two programs which we use our Title III Funding for, they are: 1. Saturday ELL Program 2. After-School ELL Program The first group is our upper grade level Newcomers. Our newcomers in grades 3 through 8 arrive throughout the school year. The amount of recent immigrants who do not speak English has increased substantially in recent years and the majority of these students are SIFE and need multiple scaffolds and support to succeed. Our newly arrived ELLs benefit from small group instruction, English immersion, and an increase in instructional time. They will be invited to attend After-school Program and the Saturday ELL Program. The following subgroup is for our Long Term ELLs. Our Long-Term ELLs are students in grades three through eight who have four our more years of ESL services. We have found that these students need to improve their reading comprehension and writing skills. Many of these students also need to be exposed to more academic conversations. As a result, we have created an after-school program that uses the independent reading program called Reading Plus. This program is extremely appropriate for long term ells and students who are not making gains annually on the NYSESLAT and other state exams. Long Term ELLs are also invited to our Saturday ELL Explorations Program. Our final targeted group is our ELLs with IEPS in all grade levels. The majority of our students in this subgroup benefit from small group instruction, hands on activities, and team teaching settings. We created our Saturday ELL Explorations Program with this group in mind. The students are encouraged to participate in theatrical programs where they are encouraged to perform, create art, and express themselves in multiple ways. Our use of the arts to increase a love of learning and expression has been extremely successful and the students have shown substantial growth in their test results. Saturday ELL Program The program will take place on Saturdays from 9:00 to 12:00 from October until May. There are a total of 23 instructional sessions. The language of instruction is English. There are 4 teachers who will be teaching this program; two teachers who have common branch licenses and two who have ENL licenses. Students will spend one hour in a math class, one hour in a science class, and two hours in an ENL class. The materials that will be used are as follows: Imagine Learning, Reading Plus, I-Ready, Guided Reading books, National Geographic's Reach program, and National Geographic's In The USA program, GoMath supplemental resources and ZSpace. After-School ELL Program The program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 to 4:30 from October until May. This program has a total of 50 instructional sessions. The language of instruction is English with native language support. There are 7 teachers (5 common branch and 2 ENL) who will be teaching this program and also 2 bilingual paraprofessionals who will be assisting the ENL teacher in each class. Paraprofessionals will be paid through other funding sources, at no cost to the Title III. Children will spend one hour focusing on content areas (math and science) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and one hour focusing on ENL instruction. The materials that will be used are as follows: Imagine Learning, National Geographic's In The USA program, and a teacher made Newcomer curriculum. The school will complement the cost of both Title III LEP Programs using other funding sources. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers will receive professional development to understand the specific needs of English Language Learners. Any teacher of ELLs will receive this professional development. ENL Teachers will meet every Wednesday for 50 minutes to discuss specific guided activities to address ENL students' specific reading, listening, speaking, writing, and emotional needs. Ms. Cucinotta, Mrs. Garcia, Ms. Gallo, Ms. Hooks, and Ms. Carlson, Ms. Pellerito, and Ms. Hill will provide professional development. Professional Learning Plan: Topic Schedule and Duration Teachers who will attend Facilitator Rationale Evidence/Outcome Focus: Who are our ELL’s? Materials: RLAT 9/17/18, 50 mintues All push in ELL Teachers J. Garcia ~ Meet with teachers to share the list of students who are ELL's in their classroom. Create a schedule that meets the mandated minutes for all ELL students. Adjusting UBD to Support Language Learners 10/1/18 Grades K - 2 ELL Teachers and Push In Teachers J. Garcia ~ Ensure understanding and comprehension of each unit of study by allowing more time for each lesson. ~ Use conference notes, small quizzes, tracking, and unit assessments ELL Identification, language levels, and coplanning 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  Part C: Professional Development 11/6/18Individual Conferences with each teacher from 8:00 to 2:20 Every teacher who works with English Language Learners J. Garcia ~ Ensure understanding and clarity of who the language learners are in their classroom and what are the language levels. Discuss test modifications. ~ Teachers are aware of who their ELL's are and have a hard copy of who they are and their language proficiency levels. Supporting Language Learners Classroom teachers of language learners J. Garcia ~ Teachers will identify the language learners in their classroom and look at their language proficiency levels. Teachers will also receive different resources, strategies and checklists to assist in scaffolding instruction for each language proficiency. ~ Teachers will use the resources in their classrooms and document the different levels of growth in each student's language proficiency. Using the Language Line for Translation All ENL teachers Besa Gashi ~ Teachers will receive information about how to use the translation line when calling parents or meeting with parents. Teachers will practice using the language line so they are comfortable to use it on their own. ~ Teachers will be able to meet and speak to parents that do not speak English. Assessing our ELLs and identifying language strengths and weaknesses Last Tuesday in October All Teachers of ELLs (03, 04, and ICT classrooms) J. Garcia ~ Provide scaffolding techniques to reach all ELL students based on language proficiency ~ All teachers of ELL's are aware of different strategies that help make content more comprehensible for language learners. Imagine Learning November PreK - 4 Teachers of ELLs J. Garcia, ~Teachers will learn how to implement the Imagine Learning program, get the students logins and teacher logins. ~ Students will begin using the program in the beginning of November and we will learn how to analyze the data and use the results to drive instruction. Language Acquisition or a Learning Disability? ENL Teachers Ms. Garcia ~20 percent of ELLs are wrongly identified as SWDs because of lack of communication between ESL Teachers and classroom teachers. This professional development session's purpose is to help encourage communication between ESL Teachers and Classroom teachers so they develop a clear understanding of the difference between Lang. Acquisition and a Learning Disability. ~Teachers will meet during ELL PLC and share findings from the session. ELL PLC December All teachers of ELLs 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  Part C: Professional Development J. Garcia ~Teachers will share and learn ESL strategies to accommodate language learners. ~The strategy will help the ELLs to study and analyze characterization. ELL PLC January All Teachers of ELLs R. Cucinotta and J. Garcia ~Teachers will share and learn ESL strategies to accomodate ESL students ~ Teachers will put the ESL strategies into practice in the classroom. ELL PLC - Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT March All Teachers of ELLs J. Garcia Teachers will look at the four parts of the NYSESLAT and come up with strategies to prepare students for the exam. Students will be prepared for the NYSESLAT. ELL PLC - Looking at the NYSESLAT - part 2 March All teachers of ELLs J. Garcia Teachers will continue to look at the NYSESLAT and coplan with ESL push in teachers to create lessons to prepare students for the exam. Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT April ENL Teachers Garcia Teachers will prepare for administering the Speaking section of the NYSESLAT and create a schedule for administering the exam. ELL PLC - Administering the Speaking section of the NYSESLAT April All push in ESL teachers J. Garcia Teachers will prepare for administering the Speaking section of the NYSESLAT. ESL Summer Enrichment Program June All ELL Teachers Ms. Garcia Familiarize ourselves with our summer school students, look at their current academic level and create goals for what we would like the students to achieve by the end of the summer program. End of summer assessment Scoring the writing for NYSESLAT Records, including attendance sheets and agendas, will be kept in a binder in the ENL room. In addition, electronic records will also be kept on google drive. Teachers who provide PD, specifically J. Garcia, will be receiving ongoing professional development by attending ELL liaison meetings with Michelle Bugay and other ELL Services Coordinators. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57 Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Involvement Plan: Parent involvement is critical to the success for our ELL population . Parents will be provided with the following in an effort to increase their involvement in their children’s education and to accomplish our literacy goal(s). We will provide: On-going communication regarding programs, services, and academic supports that will enhance and support their child’s skills and progress (Interpreter will be provided Opportunities for involvement in school-wide leadership activities such as the SLT, PTA, special projects and *events Written, verbal and on-line progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their child’s progress in their native language Immediate and on-going outreach and guidance support to help parents swiftly address and support the holistic needs of their children (Interpreter will be provided) It is evident when there is a positive and convincing relationship between family engagement and benefits for children, it improves academic achievement. This relationship holds across all families regardless of their socioeconomic status, race, ethnicity, or levels of educational attainment. When parents and school staff work together to support learning, students: (1) Earn higher grades and test scores; (2) Enroll in higher-level programs; (3) Are promoted more and earn more credits; (4) Adapt better to school and attend more regularly; (5) Have better social skills and behavior; and (6) Graduate and go on to higher education. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities We are also learning that family and community engagement have a positive impact on school improvement and reform. There is now solid research demonstrating the benefits of community involvement for schools, families and students, including improved achievement and behavior. The impact of good school-community partnerships includes: (1) Improved school leadership and staffing; (2) Higher-quality learning programs for students; (3) New resources and programs to improve teaching and curriculum; (4) Resources for after-school programs and family supports; and (5) Increased community awareness. Implementing the above will improve our relationship with our ELL community as well as achieve our literacy goal to close the achievement gap. We have three major parent programs for parents of ELLs: 1. ENL for Parents Workshops These take place on select Saturdays in October, January, and April. Parents are encouraged to drop off their children for the Saturday program and stay and ask questions about how to help support their students academically. We offer breakfast, assistance with filling out paperwork, and answering questions about their students' success in school. Ms. Garcia (ESL Coach) and Ms. Hooks (ESL Teacher) and Ms. Faral Alawi (Arabic Translating Para) facilitate these workshops. Parents are notified through fliers, posters, and phone calls. 2. Urban Advantage These trips allow parents and children to go out into the community and explore cultural institutions together. Buses and tickets to the different locations are provided by the school. This year we went to the Bronx Museum, Museum of Natural History, and the Brooklyn Botanical Gardens on days when the students had off of school and we had many parents and children attend these trips. Ms. Kathy Burgos, the guidance counselor, and Ms. Garcia, the ESL Coach, facilitated these trips and reach out to parents through phone calls and fliers. Next year, we are going to organize more trips which will take place in October, November, January, March, May and June. 3. Parent Communication on Tuesdays Each Tuesday, parents are encouraged to communicate with teachers from 2:30-3:30. Parents are invited to come to school and also are encouraged to communicate through phone or email. Translation service are provided and teachers also create newsletters to keep parents informed about the exciting things their students are learning. All teachers of ELLs facilitate these sessions. Translation paras also assist in communication. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ N/A Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name The Williamsbridge School Borough Bronx School Number 89 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal R. Martinez Coach J. Garcia ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher C. Gallo Teacher/Subject Area S. Hooks/Commonbranch Teacher/Subject Area C. Carlson/ ENL Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Meisha Ross Porter Assistant Principal R. Cucinotta Coach N/A School Counselor Brenda McFarland Parent Wendy Martinez Parent Coordinator Michelle. Gallo Field Support Center Staff Member Wladimir Pierre Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 6 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1514 Total number of ELLs 409 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 27.01% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Lang. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 6 0 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools we use are Fountas and Pinnell, NYSITELL, MOSL, and ELL Benchmark Assessments. F & P provides teacher with valuable data on students' reading comprehension, decoding, phonological awareness and levels of fluency. The NYSITELL provides data on student's level of English proficiency, MOSL determines the amount of growth each student has in writing and reading. The analysis and triangulation of these various quantitative data helps to inform the school's instructional plan and provide insights on required Tier 2 interventions, if needed. The constant monitoring of this data helps the school to reflect and revise targeted instructional intervention plans. In middle school, students are administered the DRPs. In addition, the ELL team created 3 assessments which mirror the NYSESLAT that include a series of reading, writing, speaking and listening questions. Students are assessed three times a year and we use that data to tailor instruction to accommodate each student's needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? NYSITELL assessments are ongoing based on enrollment. All ENL teachers are given time in their schedule to administer the NYSITELL as needed. In elementary school, classroom teachers administer the MOSL in October and in May. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers work in conjunction to administer the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment to students individually in September, December, April, and June. Most of our ELLs attend the after school program and we assess the students F & P level in the beginning and end of the program to track their progress. In middle school, ELA teachers administer the DRPs three times a year; in September, January, and May. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the MOSLs to identify baseline achievement of our English Language Learners. We use the ELL Periodic Assessment and NYC performance tasks to identify progress and finally year end MOSLs to track students' growth. Specific areas of need are improving writing, specifically answering short response questions. In addition, students also need to improve their reading comprehension and their acquisition of grade level vocabulary. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At interim points throughout the year, the ELL vertical professional learning teams analyzes ELL periodic and formative assessments to progress monitor the efficacy of program implementation and student language development. The teams also analyzes student writing on summative writing performance tasks to determine if strategies implemented are having a value-added impact on student outcomes. If at that time, we find that additional interventions are necessary, we group students with similar needs and use an appropriate program. Currently, ENL support teachers are trained in the Wilson Just Words program and the Wilson Fundations program. Based off of students needs, we will either regroup students who need intervention and pull them out for additional support or invite them to attend an after school, Saturday school, or summer school program which will give them additional support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Within the RtI framework, data is always used to drive instruction. At Tier 1, teachers use formative data to make revisions to lessons and units. At Tier 2, students who have been screened in need of targeted instruction are provided with Wilson intervention. We also use the RIGOR program and start up/build up to build foundational literacy skills. At Tier 3, specialized assessments are used to identify possible learning disabilities before recommendation to special education services. Staff access the data through our shared google drive folders. We have teacher team meetings twice a week, one looking at math data and one looking at ELA data, to drive and differentiate instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the NYSESLAT, MOSL, and ELA data to evaluate our ELL programs. The data for students who scored at an entering level on the NYSITELL in lower grades revealed a steady progress in phonological awareness and language acquisition. However, the majority of students in the lower grades who scored at an Expanding level either stayed on the same level or digressed to a transitioning or emerging level. The data for the students in the upper grade levels revealed that language learners are struggling with making meaning of texts and using literary strategies for literal analysis and evaluation. They also need further academic language exposure and idiomatic language. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We are currently using our MOSL results to adjust our curriculum for next year's program. A team of classroom teachers, ENL teachers, Assistant Principals and Instructional coaches are meeting for five instructional days in June to modify our current CKLA and EL programs to accommodate our English Language Learners. We are adding language objectives to daily lessons and adjusting vocabulary lessons to better suite our newcomers. ENL teachers are also going to be coteaching with 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  classrooms teachers during Science and Social Studies periods. We will also use the EDUR to ensure that all ELLs are receiving the proper amount of mandated integrated and stand alone ENL instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for ELLs is delivered as follows: Each grade has two classes with English Language Learners. We group students heterogeneously. Each class receives 180 minutes of integrated teaching from an ENL certified teacher and the ENL teacher pulls out students who require additional servicing. The instructional activities for the integrated program entail scaffolding the current curriculum to adjust students' needs based off of their language proficiency level. Classroom teachers provide grade level content while ENL teachers adjust the material through the SIOP model to make sure content in understood. Classroom teacher and ENL teachers coplan during weekly team meetings. Stand alone ENL services are for our EN and EM students. We use a teacher made newcomer curriculum that supports newcomers in their initial language acquisition. Six ENL teachers worked together over the summer to create the newcomer curriculum that has students practice reading, writing, speaking, and listening in English. The newcomer curriculum is adjusted in separate grade bands and has 4 specific levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable, TBE program is not offered at the school. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable, Dual Language programs is not offered at the school. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? To ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is delivered in the ENL program model we provide a combination of integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction provided by a certified ENL pedagogue. We have 4 certified ENL teachers who provide the mandated minutes to each English Language Learner. Each ENL teacher is responsible for servicing a specific grade band: k-1, 2-3, 4-5, and 6-8. The ENL teacher pushes in for 180 minutes during ELA/SS or Science instruction and team teaches with the classroom teacher. The ENL teacher will also pull out all students who scored at the Entering or Emerging level for an additional 180 minutes. We use the monthly EDUR to verify that each ELL is receiving the proper amount of service minutes and that all ELLs are programmed in STARS accordingly. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We use the Sheltered Instructional Observational Protocol to ensure that all content is delivered and comprehensible to all language learners. The SIOP model provides an instructional framework to support teachers in planning coherent lessons with a language focus while making content accessible to students. Teachers use content and language objectives and make them explicit to students. In addition to posting clear content and language objectives, teachers tap into students' background knowledge and introduce a variety of grade-appropriate strategies to support students in acquiring new content knowledge and academic language. Teachers scaffold academic language through academic sentence starters and frames. To monitor 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  language acquisition, teachers use a variety of formative assessment tools such as the Capellini checklist along with the ELL periodic assessments monthly to track language development and to provide informed scaffolds and interventions, as needed. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that Spanish-speaking ELLs are appropriately assessed with the Spanish LAB. Home language support is always provided via bilingual content glossaries and dictionaries. In addition, we have 4 bilingual paras who speak Spanish and Arabic. They push in to classrooms with newcomers and provide native language support. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE- Small group guided and targeted instruction is provided to SIFE students to help fill in gaps in learning. In grades K-8, a student advisory class provides socio-emotional and academic support to SIFE students. SIFE students also participate in peer tutoring and are partnered with students who speak the same home language. Furthermore, the school offers an after school program and students in grades 4 through 8 who read below a first grade reading level are pulled out and taught the Just Words Intervention program four times a week.b. Newcomer ELLs in grades 2 through 8 are provided with pull-out instructional support services using the National Geographic: Inside the U.S.A., teacher created Newcomer units, and use the imagine learning program. Additionally, Newcomer ELLs in grades K through 3 are provided with pull-out instructional support services using the Words Their Way program. c. Developing ELLs are provided integrated instruction using the Rigor program to supplement the core curriculum and improve academic vocabulary. d. Long Term ELLs are provided with integrated instruction by both an ENL teacher and a commonbranch teacher using the Rigor or EL program to supplement the core curriculum and improve academic vocabulary. In addition, long term ELLs are provided with small group instruction and invited to the ELLA Saturday school program and the after school program.e. Former ELLs are provided with integrated ENL instruction for 90 minutes per week and also receive testing accommodations, which include separate location, extended time and access to bilingual dictionaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies of ELL-SWDs are universal design for learning (UDL), explicit teaching techniques, small guided group instructions, and the SIOP model. These strategies provide access to academic content areas while also accelerating English language development by providing scaffolds for understanding, visuals, hands on learning, vocabulary enhancement and exposure to grade level content. The materials we use our high-low interest level reading books, grade-level materials, lower level books that cover the grade level content, teacher created materials, and computer programs such as imagine learning, i-ready, myon, and think central. These materials meet students where they are academically and expose them to the grade level content but on a reading level where they can read independently. This allows students to be able to participate in class discussion, comprehension questions, and successfully understand the content being taught. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by providing small group instruction, integrated teaching with the classroom and the ENL teacher, and targeted tier 2 and tier 3 interventions. For example, students are given multiple resources to scaffold understanding of grade appropriate material. ELL SWDs are given reading materials on their specific reading level but cover the same topic that is being taught in class. Also students are given smaller "juicer" passages that cover the necessary content but is more manageable for comprehension. Students are also invited to participate in after school, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  Saturday school, and summer school programs which will cover the grade level material through a variety of hands on learning experiences. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. For our newcomer ELL subgroup, we use Rigor 1 and a teacher created newcomer program to support students to make meaning of non fiction complex text. In the upper grade, we use the Just Words WILSON intervention to provide additional support in building student phonological awareness and fluency. In the lower grades, we use the Wilson Fundation formative assessment tool to monitor acquisition of early literacy skills. Additional support is provided to students in small, guided groups. Teachers use teacher-created intervention materials in addition to supplemental resources from the core curriculum. We also offer multple after school, Saturday school and Sife programs as listed below: Saturday School Academy Students will spend one hour in a math class, one hour in a science class, and two hours in an ENL class. The materials that will be used are as follows: Imagine Learning, Reading Plus, I-Ready, Guided Reading books, National Geographic's Reach program, and National Geographic's In The USA program, GoMath supplemental resources and ZSpace. After-School Newcomer Program The program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 to 4:30 from October until May. This program has a total of 43 instructional sessions. The language of instruction is English with native language support. There are 4 ENL teachers who will be teaching this program and also 4 bilingual paras who will be assiting the ENL teacher in each class. Children will spend one hour focusing on content areas (math and science) and one hour focusing on ENL instruction. The materials that will be used are as follows: Imagine Learning, National Geographic's In The USA program, and a teacher made Newcomer curriculum. SIFE Lunch and Learn The program will take place on Mondays and Fridays during student lunch periods. It will run from January until May. It will target newcomers who are identified as SIFE. The program will take place for 15 consecutive weeks with a total of 30 sessions. The language of instruction is English with native language support. There are 6 ENL teachers who will be teaching this program. Children will spend their lunch periods receiving small group instruction with a focus on speaking and listening comprehension. The materials we will use is the Just Words Reading Intervention program and NYSESLAT preparation workbooks. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are going to start grouping ELLs heterogeneously instead of by language acquisition level. We find that Entering and Emerging ELLs succeed at a faster pace when they have students who speak at various acquisition levels. In addition, we will continue to improve our current ELL standalone program by creating three assessments that will be given throughout the school year to track the growth of our Entering and Emerging English Language Learners. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A we never had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At P.S. 89x all required support services, materials and resources corresponds to the ELLs ages and grade levels. In each classroom there are leveled, culturally relevant books to meet the needs of the students (Entering - Commanding). We also provide students, especially new admits, with a desktop dictionary in their native language for clarification during the lessons. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We currently use the Imagine Learning program to provide supplemental instructional support and ensure that teachers are implementing the program with fidelity. ELLs also use the I-ready program in ELA and Math. In addition, we use ST math program which requires the use of ipads to enhance math content instruction. To further enhance instruction, teachers across grade-levels use SMART board technology to provide engaging and visual support to content area learning. We also use Brain POP videos to build background knowledge and Z-Space for 3-dimensional science experiments 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is always provided in the ENL program, through the use of bilingual glossaries and dictionaries, books in the home language, novels and when possible, oral translation by either a "buddy" student or the teacher. Teachers also use cognates in the content areas to value the home language as an asset for instruction. Translanguaging techniques are also embedded in daily lessons to bridge student learning. GO Math is also available in the home language in addition to translated resources from Engage NY 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL coordinator works closely with the support service providers to ensure that ELL students receive appropriate and research-based instructional services and interventions. In the Early grades, P.S. 89X focuses on supporting ELLs in early literacy schools through the use of technology programs such as Imagine Learning In the upper elementary grades, we use the Expeditionary Learning program with teacher-created and age-appropriate materials to provide additional scaffolds to the curriculum. In the Middle school grades, we also use the RIGOR program, which is used for older struggling and NPR "Faces the Issues" to support middle school with academic note-taking and listening. The Imagine Learning program is also adaptive and responds to the learning needs of students to provide differentiated instructional support. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, any child who is newly enrolled and has a home language other than English is invited to come in and meet with the ENL team. Children who are elgibile to take the NYSITELL are given the exam and if they are identified as an ELL, the parents will sit down with an ENL teacher and a trained translator and participate in a one on one parent choice meeting. The ENL teachers will also give the parents and children a small tour of the school, which involves meeting the classroom teacher or visiting the classroom, looking at the cafeteria, and learning where their specific enterance and exit for morning line up and dismissal is located. Parents of ELLs are also given some resources to help the children and parents become aclimated to their new environment. We have a partnership with MMCC, which runs a program to help parents learn English for free and we also give the parents a set of bilingual glossaries that they can keep at home to support their child. Because we are such a large school, we make every effort to assess all of our newly enrolled students prior to the school year. Parents appreciate the one on one meetings and the students feel comfortable and more prepared when they begin school. When a new ELL enrolls in the middle of the school year, the ENL Coordinator or one of the ENL teachers will come down to meet the child and the parents to assess the initial language needs of the student. The child will be temporarily placed in a classroom and will take the NYSITELL. Once the results are determined, the parents will attend a parent choice meeting and the child will be placed in a classroom according to the parents preference. Newcomers will be serviced through an integrated model and receive stand alone ENL instruction. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, PS 89X does not offer language electives. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At P.S. 89x, we provide all ENL, monolingual, and support staff such as: paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, speech teachers, secretaries, and parent coordinator with ongoing opportunities to attend both on-site and off-site workshops which reflect current theory based learning practices used for ENL instruction. Providing teachers with effective learning opportunities is the key to increasing student performance. As a result of these workshops, teachers have adopted many of the learning models that support achievement for our ELL population. They are encouraged to work collaboratively in professional learning teams to revise lessons and units of study. Grade conferences, Vertical and Horizontal meetings keep staff members abreast of ongoing changes in the Language Allocation Policy document. These workshops are provided by our principal, assistant principal, team leaders, ELA and MATH staff developers, coaches, ELL specialists, and Literacy Support consultants. Some topics that will be addresses are: Overview of the ENL Program , LAP document, Use of assessments for the ELLs, Data Driven Instruction (NYSESLAT), Writer's Workshop, NYSESLAT and NYISTELL, Common Core State Standards and TOMs. Professional Development is provided for all staff keeping them abreast of changes CR-PART 154 state regulations for the ELLs. During the month of June, teachers and administrators meet to discuss the incoming students and how they can collaborate to ease the children's transition from one grade to another. They meet to discuss placement, special needs and status of any evaluation that is pending. Teachers also meet to discuss the administration of the NYSESLAT and what we can do the following year to better prepare our students. Teachers will also have the opportunity to attend workshops such as: QTEL, NYSABE, professional learning opportunities offered by DELLSS and through Fordham. All teachers attending workshops will keep an ongoing log of the hours, certificates of attendance, professional development summaries are responsible to turn-key the information/resources shared during weekly meetings with their professional learning teams.. Teachers of ELLs participate in all onsite trainings given by the ENL Coach and Literacy Support Consultants. In addition, teachers participate in off-site professional development offered through the Middle School Quality Initiative and Fordham R-BERN. MSQI and Fordham RBERN provide additional training on how to provide access to the Common Core Learning Standards for diverse learners. ENL Teachers also participate in conferences which address ELLs needs for success. Last year the ENL Coach attended Harvard where speakers like Maryann Cuchhiara addressed ways schools can address ELLs needs in Instructional Shifts to Meet Common Core Demands. This year the ENL Coach and an ENL Teacher attended a conference on how to build performance character and moral character for ELLs to persevere through the challenging task of succeeding in academic excellence. All information from conferences is shared with all other ENL Teachers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All ENL teachers attend an ELL Focused PLC every other Tuesday. During this PLC, we look at student data, plan for instruction, adjust curriculum to accommodate ELLs, and create assessments to prepare students for the NYSESLAT. This is approximately 20 hours a year. The ENL Coordinator also works with the math and literacy coaches to provide quality professional development to ENL teachers. The ENL Coordinator provides one on one support in the classroom, during teachers's preps, and after school. Each ENL teacher works directly with ENL Coach for at least 20 hours a year. The majority of our ELL 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  teachers also attend two full day ELLA training sessions every year and attend multiple professional learning opportunities offered by DELLSS and the Fordham RBERN . This June, we also had a three hour Saturday professional development on-site session to prepare teachers who will be working with ELLs next year. In addition to the PLC, the ENL Coach offers multiple ELL focused professional development sessions to the whole staff. This is approximately 5 hours a year. Certificates of participation, copies of the professional learning agendas, and attendance sheet are stored in a central location for easy access and audit purposes. They are also scanned and saved on our google drive. Teachers who participate in off-site professional development are required to turn-key information to their colleagues during professional development Mondays and Tuesday as provisioned by the UFT contract. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides frequent individual meetings and phone calls during Family Engagement time with parents of ELLs to keep them informed of the goals of the program, results on language proficiency assessments and to discuss language development needs of each child. Bilingual paraprofessionals are assigned to work with the ENL team to make weekly phone calls with parents of ELLs. Topics of phone calls are: Saturday school program, After School Program, Summer School program, NYSESLAT results, testing schedule, and family trips. Parent letters are distributed in their home languages in the beginning of the year notifying parents of their child's NYSESLAT results. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Every year, ELL Parents are invited to participate in multiple all expense paid trips sponsored by Urband Advantage. This year, the program was very successful and we went to the Hall of Science, the Aquarium, the Museum of Natural History and the Queens Zoo. In each trip, we had over 80 participants. When we inform parents about these trips, we try to pick days that work for multiple families. We contact parent through the phone and through flyers in multiple languages. Parents are invited to bring all of their children and this year we began having breakfast before the event to get parents to begin networking with each other. We also have multiple performance during the ELLA program and during the school year where we invite parents to come and see their children perform. The Parent Coordinator, ENL Coordinator of P.S. 89x provide ongoing workshops for ELL parents to attend. During all the events, translators are available to assist parents of ELLs with any language challenges. Letters are sent home to parents informing them of the availability of translators during the parent teacher conferences and monthly workshops given at P.S. 89x. We also have a partnership with MMCC where parents are invited to take a free ENL class. This year we have over 60 participants. The ENL Coordinator visits the site multiple times a year and meets with parents to discuss any questions they have about their child's progress Records will be kept through the PS 89 Portal which keeps all logs, Agendas and sign in sheets electronically. In addition a binder will be kept with all originals. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  2018-19 SCEP-FF 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ralph Martinez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS89 School DBN: 11x089 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ralph Martinez Title Principal Regina Cucinotta Assistant Principal Michelle Gallo Parent Coordinator C Gallo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Wendy Martinez Parent C. Carlson Teacher/Subject Area S. Hooks J. Garcia n/a Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Brenda McFadden School Counselor Meisha Ross Porter Wladimir Pierre Besa Gashi Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other LAC and Pupil Accounting Secretary Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11x089 School Name: The Williamsbridge School Superintendent: JeremyKabinoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Besa Gashi Pupil Accounting Secretary Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes LAC is also Member of the Language Access Advisory Board for Bronx / BXLAAB Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies we use to assess language preferences of the parent community at PS 89 is first to administer the Home Language Identification Survey and, and then to conduct a thorough parent interview in the language of preference by a licensed pedagogue. Once the parent has filled out their language preference form, Student Emergency card, and language home survey, the data is entered manually into ATS. We use the RCPL report in ATS to ensure that all written communication is sent home in the parent's language of preference. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Cebuano Chinese Estonian French Fulani Hindi Italian English Pilipino Punjabi Shluh Slovak Thai Tibetan Urdu Vietnamese Wolof 87 81 7 0 5 1 3 1 1 2 1352 1 1 1 0 1 1 33 17 1 4.21 3.92 .34 0 .24 .05 .15 .05 .05 .1 65.47 .05 .05 0.05 0 .05 .05 1.6 .82 .05 88 82 7 2 5 0 3 1 1 2 4.26 3.97 .34 .1 .24 0 .15 .05 .05 .1 1343 65.04 1 1 1 1 1 1 34 17 1 .05 .05 .05 .05 .05 .05 1.6 .82 .05 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Albanian Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Monthly Calendars Each Month Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Existing templates from Translation and Interpretation Unit, School Support Staff and the Big Word Principal Letters Testing Memos After School/ Saturday School/ Summer School Notices September, January, April, and June School Support Staff and the Big Word April After School forms - November Saturday School forms - January Summer School forms - June School Support Staff and Translation and Interpretation Unit Existing templates from Translation and Interpretation Unit, School Support Staff and the Big Word Newsletters September, November, January, March, and May School Support Staff and Translation and Interpretation Unit Report Cards/ Promotion in doubt letters November and March Parent/ Student Handbooks September Parent Surveys March Event Flyers Monthly Existing templates from the T & I Intranet page School Support Staff and Translation and Interpretation Unit Existing templates from the T & I Intranet page. For language not available on the intranet page, we will use the Big Word or Guideline Language Services. School Support Staff and the Big Word 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide ELL Parent Meeting ongoing Parent Teacher Conference September, November, March and May IEP Meeting ongoing Pre - K, Kindergarten and 6th grade Orientation September interpretation service(s)? Translation and Interpretation Unit, School Support Staff and the Big Word Translation and Interpretation Unit, School Support Staff and the Big Word Translation and Interpretation Unit, School Support Staff and the Big Word School Support Staff and Big Word 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 75  Our secretaries, support staff, paraprofessionals, and school aides that speak Arabic, Albanian, Bengali, Haitian Creole, French, Serbian, Spanish, and Urdu. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The LAC turn keys all information from the training to whole staff. The LAC provides school community bi-monthly with OPI (Over-the-Phone Interpretation) instruction manual for quick access. The LAC also shares with entire school community information via email related to new language services and application forms in place. The LAC provides training for teachers in how to use the language line for over the phone interpretation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) a. A copy of the notice informing parents about their rights regarding translations and interpretations services will be distributed. Parents will also be made aware of these rights during meetings with school staff, i.e., conferences, IEP meetings, etc. b. Signs offering translation services and assistance in the parents’ respective languages will be posted in the main office and by the security desk. c. The locations of the signs will be stated in the school's safety plan. The safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services will not be prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The feedback from parents on the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services will be assessed using surveys, which allow parents to specify areas in which they need help, through conversations, and PTA meetings. We will use the information gathered from the surveys to evaluate whether our translation and interpretation services address the needs of the parents. We will regularly adjust our procedures and implement new ones to address parental needs. We have implemented the feedback by hiring more bilingual paraprofessionals and office staff. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 76  2018-19 SCEP-FF 77 
