2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X095 School Name: P.S. 095 SHEILA MENCHER Principal: SERGE MARSHALL DAVIS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/MS 95 321000010095 K - 8 School Number (DBN): 10X095 3961 HILLMAN AVENUE – BRONX, NEW YORK 10463 718 – 796 - 9200 Phone Number: 718 – 796 - 7330 Fax: SERGE MARSHALL DAVIS SDAVIS6@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: SERGE MARSHALL DAVIS Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: JAMES REGAN DARELLINNISS Parents’ Association President: FRANCHESKARODRIGUEZ SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): DARELLINNISS N/A N/A TANIA LIBERATA& KATHERINE LUIS CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 10 MARIBELHULLA Superintendent: 1 FORDHAM PLAZA – Bronx, NY 10458 Superintendent’s Office Address: MHULLA@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718 – 741 - 7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  BRONX FSC: JOSE RUIZ Executive Director: 1230 ZEREGA AVENUE, BRONX, NY 10462 / ONE FORDHAM PLAZA, BRONX, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 718 – 828-6280 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tania Liberata &Katherine Luis CBO Representative, if applicable FrancheskaRodriguez Member/ Chairperson (Teacher) Beverley Tobias Nicole Tyson Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5 Name Serge Marshall Davis James Regan DarellInniss DarellInniss *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools)  Name SamiraFeratovic Dawn Mareth Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school’s mission statement stipulates, “We, the community of educators of PS/MS 95, will provide a risk-free learning environment so that students become life-long learners who take ownership of their learning. We will actively observe, engage, and assess our students by using formal and informal methods. By analyzing our data and by adapting best teaching practices, we will differentiate instruction in order to meet individual academic and social needs of our students. In taking such a holistic approach, every adult at PS/MS 95 will play an active role in fulfilling every student’s unique potential.” 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/MS 95 is a K – 8 school with approximately 1256 students. The school is located in the Northwestern section of the Bronx. The school has several partnerships to support our quest in developing the whole child, some of the partnerships are as follows:  Wellness In The Schools (WITS), which teaches our students and parents ways to maintain “Healthy Bodies and Healthy Minds” through labs, Cafe Day, workshops, and family fitness nights.  Montefiore Mosholu Clinic that provides medical and dental services to our students  Dream Yard Program focuses on the integration of art forms across curricula. Instruction is delivered by a DreamYard teaching artist and the classroom teacher.  Dancing Classroom, Inc. teaches our students how to ballroom dance (i.e., rhumba, tango, foxtrot, merengue, salsa, and the swing). A dance instructor from Dancing Classroom in collaboration with the classroom teacher teach the students how the different dance steps/moves.  Montefiore Mosholu Community Center a DYCD funded program, which provides academic and extra-curricular activities to our students through their Compass and SONYC programs   Bent On Learning offers yoga instruction to our students primarily during physical education classes  B'N'Fit program, which promotes weight management through healthy eating habits and fitness 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school population is comprised of 16.56% African-American, 71.1% Hispanics, 4.7% White, 5.1% Asian students, and 2.56% of other ethnicity. The student body includes 16.24% English Language Learners and 20.38% Student With Disabilities. Boys account for 49.52% of the students enrolled and girls account for 50.48%. The average attendance rates so far this school year is 93.8%. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has several strengths; however, we will highlight some of our strengths that demonstrate our school impact on student learning and teacher development: The latest Quality Review cited that the school has a rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Additionally, in the 2017-18 Quality Review, QR indicator 3.4 High Expectations was rated “Well-developed,” which cited these findings, “School leaders and staff consistently communicate high expectations aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching via clear expectation memoranda, such as the expectation handbook and the daily message board. School leaders and staff effectively communicate and support high expectations for college and career readiness to families.” The impact of indicator 3.4 High Expectations was stated,"Teachers benefit from a culture of mutual accountability within the structure of their grade teams. Explicit communications empower families to support their students' academic progress toward college and career readiness." Our most recent school’s accomplishments are as follows: According to the NYS Education Report Card, our school has achieved ‘Good Standing’ status on all state accountability measures for this school year. Our school has shown the most growth in DTSDE tenets 2 and 3 respectively. Quality Review indicator 1.1, which focuses on curriculum, the MOLP feedback was, “The school leader’s curricular decisions ensures school wide curricular coherence in key subjects and engages students in demanding academic tasks.” The school will maintain its 2018-19 CEP 10  commitment to devise school programming that will enable teachers to meet weekly to work collaboratively on curriculum, lesson planning, analysis of student work, and to share best practices. In addition, the school will continue its inquiry-based vertical planning teams to strengthen the coherence that currently exists across curricula and to promote optimal learning for all students. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X095 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1288 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 90 92 32 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 58 57 25 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 80.7% % Reduced Lunch 17.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 70.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.25 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 73% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 105 106 13 91.6% 0.5% 19.5% 17.0% 6.2% 1.9% 8 9% 7.8 25.2% 21% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Many sources (i.e., Quality Review, School Quality Snapshot, Measures of Leadership Practice, NYS School Report Card, etc.) have highlighted the following as strengths: 1. Curriculum - "Ensure engaging, rigorous , and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards." 2. School Culture: "Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations for staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations." 3. Systems for improvement: "Observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection." Although, our teacher pedagogy and assessment were rated proficient (source: QR and MOLP), our priority this school year, is to strengthen teacher practice so teachers can intellectually engage students in learning activities that promote student thinking through questioning and discussion techniques. In addition, we will ensure that students use rubrics/checklists as self-assessment or self-monitoring tool to guide them in producing quality and accurate work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ● By June 2019, 98% of teachers will intellectually engage all students in rigorous instruction through challenging tasks suitable to their ability and need using blended learning, small groups/rotations, and discourse; as a result, grades 3-8 students 2019 NYS Reading performance will increase by 3% from the 2018 NYS Reading exam performance data. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To maintain rigor and coherence that aligned with CCLS and instructional shifts, the school curriculum vertical planning teams will meet twice a month for two hours to discuss impact and refinements of our curricula. (SOP 3.4) Teachers, instructional coaches, and administrators October 1, 2015 – June 21,2019 Teacher teams will meet weekly to discuss units of study, lesson plans, analyze student work using research based protocols to monitor impact of curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment. (SOP 3.3, 3.4) Teachers, instructional coaches, administrators September 17, 2017 – June 19, 2019 Through the inquiry process, each team will be responsible to make low inference classroom observations to monitor implementation of classroom/instructional systems. The Instructional Leadership Team will make refinement decisions. Teachers are expected to implement curriculum. Supervisors will ensure effective implementation through informal and formal observations and feedback. Through various partnerships, our teachers will co-teach with teaching artists to integrate the arts across curricula. (SOP 3.2, 3.3, 3.4) Teachers, and teaching artists October 15, 2018 – May 20, 2019 Principal and assistant principals will oversee the program. On-going professional development will be offered and facilitated by teachers to ensure that teachers are proficient in using Engrade and Excel for data recordkeeping and to create comprehensive reports. (SOP 3.5) Teachers September 15, 2018 – June 21, 2019 Principal and assistant principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will continue to engage and support families' understanding of rigorous instruction and NYS State standards in various ways: newsletters, parent meetings, weekly and monthly workshops, and monthly parent talk 2018-19 CEP 14  forums. Beginning in the month of September 2018 will offer workshops opportunity dealing with a wide range of topics: curriculum, social emotional, parenting, importance of reading/literacy, parenting, recreational program,and more. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To ensure the implementation of the above mentioned action plan, we will need the expertise and service of classroom teachers, instructional coaches, Assistant Principals, and partners. We will use our school budget to purchase instructional supplies, pay for our partnerships with Dream Yard, Dancing Classrooms, Joyce Theatre, etc… Additionally, we will continue to use flexible programming to provide common planning time for teachers to work collaboratively within teacher teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, our grades 3-8 students mid-line assessment results in i-Ready reading and mathematics will increase by 5% respectively from their baseline scores as a result of tiered learning approach, rotations/workstations, conferencing and guided groups. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) i-Ready Benchmark Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school has established a school wide character education curriculum to educate students around six pillars: Responsibility, Citizenship, Caring, Trustworthiness, Respect, and Fairness. The school Peer Mediation program is designed to help students resolve their conflicts and hold themselves accountable for their actions. The school has partnered with many outside organizations such as Montefiore Mosholu Clinic, Wellness In The Schools, and NYPD – Explorers Program, CONCEPT TEAM from the Bronx District Attorney Office to enhance student awareness on bullying prevention, drug abuse, violence prevention, health and nutrition, and other student needs. The school has continued its 3-G campaign (Good attendance, Good citizenship, and Good grades) to empower student socially and academically. Our school Learning Environment Survey has indicated that the school needs to provide on-going professional development to staff on management techniques that have proven to work with challenging students. In addition, we need to have on-going special assemblies for students and parents that address prevalent social issues. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ● By June 2019, the school OORS report will show a 5% decrease on student principal level suspension; as a result, of the positive impact that our school SEL program - RULER, character education curriculum, and 3-G campaign for positive behavior reinforcement. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Selected students from grades 5 through 8 to be trained to serve as peer mediators. Peer mediators will mediate issues amongst fellow students during their lunch periods. (SOP 5.2, 5.3) Students October 3, 2018 – June 25, 2019 Two teachers supervise the program. Special assemblies and workshops will be facilitated by various outside organizations to promote student awareness on safety and healthy choices: NYPD – 50 th Pct. Safety Unit, Bronx District Attorney Office, Cornell University, WITS, NYC Dept. of Health, Fresh Air Fund, Advocate for Children, Ready 911, and HMO. (SOP 5.3,5.5) Students and parents October 3, 2018 – June 25, 2019 The program oversees by the principal and designated personnel Guidance counselors and social worker will conduct scheduled classroom visits to engage student in discussion on various social emotional issues.( SOP 5.4, 5.5) Students October 3, 2018 – June 25, 2019 Principal and grade level assistant principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school offers a monthly open forum called "Parent Talk" facilitated by our Parent Coordinator to engage parents in conversation on education and parenting issues as well as providing parents with an opportunity to network. The school offers a health and nutrition program for parents through Cornell University, which will begin during the month of November 2018 for ten weeks to educate and bring awareness on the benefits of healthy eating habits and exercise. Throughout the school year, families will be engage in a series of health and fitness events. The school will offer ongoing workshops (October 8, 2018 - May 20, 2019) to our ENL and SWD parents facilitated by administrators, instructional coaches, and classroom teachers to support parents on understanding the goals written on student IEPs, the process and format of the NYSESLAT, curricular and more.... 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be allocated through the school budget to provide the student with experiential learning through educational trips (i.e., plays, museums, etc…). Monthly meetings will be scheduled before, during, and after school with related personnel to monitor the success of each program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By January 2019, the school safety and discipline committee will analyze the OORS report to determine if the school is on track to meet its goal. ● By January 2019, the school Leadership Team will analyze learning celebrations and the October and November 2018 parent teacher conferences sign-in sheets to gauge if the school is on track to meet its goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Conduct sheets and behavior charts Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-18 quality review indicator 4.2 stipulates the following:   Findings: "All teachers are engaged in grade level teams and cycles of inquiry. Teachers actively address areas of student need that is revealed from the analysis of student work during meetings." Impact: "Professional collaborations on grade level teams have strengthened the instructional capacity of teachers and promoted implementation of Common Core Learning Standards and the instructional shifts. The work of teacher teams results in the establishment of learning goals and planned interventions for students leading to mastery of goals for groups of students." As a school, we do encourage teacher collaboration through our common planning meetings and teacher-led professional development. However, we need to continue strengthening our core beliefs regarding teaching and learning in order to share and embed best teaching practices across curricula and classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ● By June 2019, 98% of our classroom teachers will participate in at least five intra-visitations to share and learn best instructional practices from each other using the Danielson Teaching Rubrics; as a result, teacher 2018-2019 Measure of Teacher Practice overall rating of Developing will decrease by 2% from the previous school year. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Ongoing professional development focusing on differentiated instruction and questioning and discussion techniques. (SOP 4.2, 4.4, 4.5) Teachers Ongoing internal workshops facilitated by teachers for teachers to share strategies that work. (SOP 4.2) Teachers Teacher teams will meet weekly to develop rigorous learning tasks as per units of study learning targets, and to analyze student performance data using research-based protocols. (SOP 4.2, 4.5) Teachers October 10, 2018 – June 25, 2019 October 10, 2018 – June 25, 2019 September 11, 2018 – June 24, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year, beginning in the month of October 2018 to the month of May 2019 Parent workshops, classroom visits/ learning celebrations, networking activities. In addition, parents are invited in First Friday Read Aloud for grades K-2. Other grades do learning walks and article discussion involving parent, staff and faculty and students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources and Capital resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the administrative cabinet will conduct an analysis of teachers’ observation reports to determine if the school is on track to meet the goals set. By February 2019, the instructional leadership team will analyze students’ summative data results, Learn BOOST grade book, report cards on STARS Classroom and STARS Admin to determine if the school is on track to meet the goal set. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Formative and Summative assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Both the Quality Review and Measure of Leadership Practice (MOLP) have highlighted indicators 1.1 and 4.1 as strengths for our school. The MOLP report stated, “The principal and Assistant Principals conduct frequent observations of teacher practice. Clear low observation noticing is shared with teachers both verbally and in written form. The administrative team provides teachers with feedback that clearly identifies their next steps. As a result, teachers are reflective about their practice and implement recommendations made by the administrative team (4.1).” Nonetheless, the School Quality Snapshot and Guide have revealed that the school is approaching targets in closing the achievement gap for SWD and ELL students. Thus, meeting target in closing the achievement target for SWD and ELL students will be a priority during the 2018-19 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, grades 3-8 students who take the NYS Mathematics exam will increase their proficiency level by 5% from the previous school year score, as a result of the impact of differentiated instruction, questioning and discussion techniques and the fusion the Advanced Literacy Hallmarks. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development series on differentiated instruction and questioning and discussion techniques, and Advanced Literacy Hallmarks to ensure teacher development regarding these instructional practices. (SOP 2.4) Teachers October 15, 2018 – June 25, 2019 Evaluate lesson plans during instructional observations to look for evidence of differentiated activities/practices and/or essential questions. (SOP 2.3, 2.5) Teachers October 15, 2016 – June 25, 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers are responsible for implementing the instructional strategies. Principal, Assistant Principals, and instructional coaches are responsible to oversee the implementation process Principal and Assistant Principals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the school year 2018-19, the School Leadership Team and the school principal will conduct give parent ample opportunities through school survey an/or conferences to have a voice in school initiatives and decision process. During the 2018-19 school year the school parent coordinator and guidance counselor will send respective newsletter at home to provide parents with tips on how to support their children with homework and how to address their social emotional needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Establishing flexibility in our school programming in order to plan intra-visitations to foster peer learning/collaboration. School funds are needed to pay for teacher workshops and/or compensation for teachers. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the administrative cabinet in conjunction with the instructional leadership team will analyze mathematics data collected through periodic instructional rounds, fluency and problem solving formative data, summative data. and compare i-ready baseline to mid-line data to determine if the school is on track to meet the goal set. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. i-Ready, formative and summative assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s latest Quality Review highlighted the following supporting evidence:   "Families are provided the expectations for their children through newsletters, parent meetings, bi-monthly workshops, and monthly parent talk forums. Family newsletters clarify what is expected; inform parents of workshops and meeting and the identification of community resources. For example, the February newsletter encouraged parents to take advantage of the upcoming workshops and identified employment opportunities for family members and the classes offered at the Bronx Adult Learning Center. School staff provides families with resources enabling them to support their child's progress toward colleage and career readiness." "The parent coordinator and school leadership team host workshops for families that include health and wellness, technology resources, immigration and citizenship services. Grade level teams facilitate orientation meetings at the start of the school year that clarify expectations for families. Teachers review school-wide policies, curricula, the school's mission, vision, and any new initiatives. Additionally, staff identifies ways that parents can support their child at home." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of June 2019, our school attendance will increase from 91.6% to 92%; as a result of increase parent participation in school activities. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Ongoing workshops will be offered to parents to inform and educate in the following areas, but not limited to: Common Core Learning Standards, curriculum, assessments, The Capacity Framework, Citywide Instructional Expectations, Danielson Teaching Framework, Social media issues, bullying prevention, Drop-Out prevention, High School articulation, health and nutrition, and mental illness. (SOP 6.2, 6.4) Parents and students October 15, 2018 – June 25, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional coaches, teachers, and parent coordinator On a monthly basis, time will be allotted to teachers to call, e-mail or have face-to-face conference with parents to discuss their child’s social and/or academic progress. (SOP 6.3) Parents and students Monthly open forum titled “Parent Talk” to network and discuss various pertinent issues regarding parenting, social issues and educational issues. (SOP 6.2, 6.4, 6.5) Monthly newsletters from the Parent Coordinator, grade level, teachers, guidance counselors, and social worker to update parents on teaching, learning, resources, and social services. (SOP 6.2,6.3) Parents Parents October 15, 2018 – June 25, 2019 October 15, 2018 – June 25, 2019 October 15, 2018 – June 25, 2019 Teachers and parent coordinator Parent Coordinator, Principal Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors/Social Worker, and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The administrative team, parent coordinator, teachers and guidance counselors/social worker help to foster relationships with various organizations to support our families during the school year: Moshulu Montefiore Community Center Compas and SONYC , Cornell Nutrition Program, and Wellness In The Schools , Dancing Classrooms, Bent On Learning, and more. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School personnel and outside organizations to facilitate workshops for parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 26  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the attendance committee members will analyze class, grade, and school attendance data to determine if the school is on track to meet its attendance goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily Attendance List, Attendance Track Sheet Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reading skill-based intervention Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Levels 1 and 2 students ELL and SWD students Mathematics Levels 1 and 2 students Mathematics skill-based intervention ELL and SWD students Science Level 1 and 2 students Enrichment Program – students who will be taken Earth Science Regents Content-based reading comprehension and hands-on projects Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tiered assignments – differentiated instruction: various groupings will be used based on the deficiencies of individual students or sub-groups. Teacher or provider will work with students one-to-one or in small group Push-in and pull-out service by SETSS and F-status math teachers to work with students one-to-one, or in small group. Small group instruction and one-to-one method of instruction will be used to address student’s learning needs. Tier I differentiation and modification of instruction will be provided by classroom teachers during the school day. Tier II push-in/pull-out academic assistance will be provided during the school day. Intervention program will be provided after school and during Saturday Academy. Push-in/pull-out and small group will be provided during the school day. Intervention programs will be provided after school and during Saturday Academy. Small group instruction will be provided during the school day. Intervention/Enrichment programs will be provided before and/or after school 2018-19 CEP 28  Social Studies Level 1 and 2 students Enrichment Program – students who will be taken the U.S. History Regents Lowest third students and students with low grades and poor attendance At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Content-based reading comprehension and hands-on projects Addressing the social emotional needs of students through counseling, mediation, and conflict resolution Small group instruction and one-to-one method of instruction will be used to address student’s learning needs. One-to-one and small group. Small group instruction will be provided during the school day. Enrichment programs will be provided before and/or after school During the school day. After school program – awareness programs on social issues. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 265 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We support our STH with school supplies, ensure that students are included in all school related activities, and Academic services Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  PS/MS 95 will continue to enhance its commitment to teacher development by providing teachers with ample opportunities to collaborate with peers and attend professional development based on their Pedagogical Needs Assessment.  PS/MS 95 will continue to use our highly qualified allocation to support personnel in meeting their certification requirements – professional development hours, course work, and professional institute/conference to strengthen their pedagogy.  Partnership with Pace University, Lehman College, and individual partnership with students from Manhattan College, Bronx Community, and Monroe College – internship/Residency program, where undergraduate or master level students work with experienced teachers in our schools to deepen their pedagogical knowledge base. The school will interview prospective candidates from that pool to fill-in all vacancies.  School administrators will attend job fairs to interview certified teachers.  Teachers will be recruited through the Open Market System. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Central and/or network professional development series for administrators, teachers, and related personnel  School professional development series on CCSS and Danielson Framework  School monthly meetings for paraprofessionals to provide them with instructional strategies to support student learning in the classroom  ELI workshops/conferences for school administrators 2018-19 CEP 32   On-going arts integration workshops facilitated by Dream Yard Organization  On-going Dance workshops facilitated by Joyce Theatre  Weekly and monthly professional development on curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment facilitated by school personnel Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). School will offer parent orientation/articulation to inform and educate parents on school’s programs and social and academic expectations. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school has an established MOSL committee to lend a voice in the decision making process regarding the use of multiple assessment measures. All members have attended MOSL workshops and will remain entrenched in the process. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 2018-19 CEP 33  consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 883,947.00 212,034.00 27,556.00 7275 6,726,286.00 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) section 5 Section 5 Section5 Section 5 Section 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 34  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/MS95, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [PS/MS95] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 37  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS95, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 38  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 39  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 CEP 40  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The school 's Title III program will focus on addressing ELL students' needs in the four modalities: reading, writing, listening and speaking. Last school year's NYSESLAT data showed that our ELL students are struggling with the listening and speaking components of the exam. We will have an after school program that will address the needs mentioned above. Students will be assessed in accordance with ESL and Common Core standards in order to measure students' progress and refine instruction to use various modalities of teaching. We will use the i-Ready Reading Program and Imagine Learning. The instructional foci for the after-school program will target the following domains : Phonemic Awareness, Phonics, Vocabulary, and Reading Comprehension. Additionally, we will use the following resources to support student learning development in these four modalities: Reading, Writing, Listening, and Speaking: Empire State NYSESLAT for ESL/ELL by Continental Press, trade books accompanied with CD's and web-based programs. The program will consist of two days per week for 90 minutes (i.e.,3:30PM - 5:00PM) each day. Grades 3 through 8 ESL/Bilingual students will be targeted to attend the program. Four teachers with ESL/Bilingual licenses will be hired for this program. Instruction will be delivered in English using ELL strategies and methodologies, with Native Language Arts support. The program will run from November through May every Monday and Wednesday: 11/5/18 -5/29/19. The Saturday Program will serve the same targeted 90 students. The instructional foci will be reading comprehension and writing. We will use the Empire State NYSESLAT and Imagine Learning as primary resources. Four (4) ESL/Bilingual certified teachers will be hired to work in the program. The program will follow this schedule: March 9 - May 25, 2019 from 8:30AM -12:45PM. In both programs (i.e., After School and Saturday Academy), the students will be grouped as follows: 1. Grade 3 - students are grouped by grade level 2. Grade 4 - students are grouped by grade level 3. Grades 5 and 6 - grouped together 4. Grades 7 and 8 - grouped together Note: Within each classroom, the teacher uses student data to create flexible groupings in order to address sub-group and individual needs. 2018-19 CEP 43  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Through a "Pedagogical Needs Assessment" form, which teachers are asked to fill out by administration; as a result, an annual professional development plan is devised for all teachers to meet their specific pedagogical needs. Additionally, on-going internal/external professional development to enhance teacher practices will be provided. ESL/Bilingual teachers will be offered internal professional development on the following dates: Topic: Vocabulary in Context Rationale: Teachers will become familiar with strategies they can use to enable ELL students to find meaning of words by using clues around the words. Date: December 6, 2018 Time: 3:30PM - 5:00PM Name of Provider: Instructional Coach Audience: ELL/Bilingual Teachers Topic: Writing Workshop Rationale: Teachers will learn the principles of writer's workshop and how to support writers through the writing process. Date: February 7, 2019 Time: 3:30PM - 5:00PM Name of Provider: Instructional Coach Audience: ELL/Bilingual Teachers Topic: Tiered Assignments Rationale: Teachers will learn how to plan instruction that will provide learners with multiple entry points to acquire learning by using various modalities. Date: March 21, 2019 Time: 3:30PM - 5:00PM Name of Provider: Instructional Coach Audience: ELL/Bilingual Teachers The external professional development will be on-going based on needs through the following vendors/organizations: ASCD, Solution Tree, Ventures Education,Heinneman etc… Weekly common planning meetings as well as monthly faculty and grade meetings are platforms utilized to build teacher capacity on research-based practices. The following topics will be addressed: Curriculum Planning, Content Vocabulary, Reading Strategies for ELL students, Data Analysis, Conferencing with students, Common Core State Standards, Differentiated Instruction and Strategies for ELL students to develop language skills. 2018-19 CEP 44  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The school will provide on-going parent workshops to inform and educate parents on curriculum and assessments: NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Math State exams. Also, parents will be provided with cutting edge educational information dealing with the social and academic development of ESL/Bilingual students. The school will schedule a minimum of 5 workshops to address the aforementioned. The topics to be discussed: Topic: ELL Compliance Rationale: Parents will be provided with information to deepen their understanding of the different ELL programs and services that are offered. Date: October 9, 2018 Time: 9:00AM - 10:30AM/ 3:30PM - 5:00PM Name of Provider: Assistant Principal/Parent Coordinator/Instructional Coaches Audience: ELL/Bilingual Parents Topic: Demystification of the NYSESLAT Exam - Part I Rationale: To familiarize parents with the administration of the NYSESLAT and to make transparent the purpose of each assessment: speaking, and listening. Date: November 13, 2018 Time: 9:00AM - 10:30AM/3:30PM - 5:00PM Name of Provider: Assistant Principal/Parent Coordinator Audience: ELL/Bilingual Parents Topic: Demystification of the NYSESLAT Exam - Part II Rationale: To familiarize parents with the administration of the NYSESLAT and to make transparent the purpose of each assessment: reading and writing. Date: January 22, 2019 Time:9:00AM - 10:30AM/3:30PM - 5:00PM Name of Provider: Assistant Principal/Parent Coordinator Audience: ELL/Bilingual Parents Topic: How to Help your Child with Homework Rationale: Parents will learn key strategies that will enable them to become active participants in their child homework process. Date: February 26, 2019 Time: 9:00AM - 10:30AM Name of Provider: ELL Teacher/Parent Coordinator/Assistant Principal Audience: ELL/Bilingual Parents Topic: How to Help your Child Cope with Social Emotional Issues Rationale: Parents will learn different approaches to help their child develop healthy habits to deal with challenges. 2018-19 CEP 45 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Date: March 26, 2019 Time: 9:00AM - 10:30AM/3:30PM - 5:00PM Name of Provider: Guidance Counselor/Social Worker/Parent Coordinator/Assistant Principal Audience: ELL/Bilingual Teachers Parents will be informed of these workshops through our school's monthly calendar, our school automated voice messaging system - Global Connect, school flyers and our school's newsletter. The school will apply all appropriate translation and interpretation services to ensure that a high percentage of our parents will participate in these workshops. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Sheila Mencher Van Cortlandt School Borough Bronx School Number 95 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Serge Marshall Davis Coach Brandi Nankivel ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jessica Rivera Teacher/Subject Area James Regan/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Beth Kosofsky/ENL Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Omara Flores Coach type here School Counselor Erin Ehrlich Parent type here Parent Coordinator Delis DeLeon Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 5 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1316 2018-19 CEP 47 Total number of ELLs 250 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 1 3 1 2 1 4 1 K 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 5 0 0 0 0 0 5 1 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. In the early grades, we assess students by using various methods of formal and informal assessments for example: Baselines, Midlines and Endlines in Reading and Mathematics, we also assess initial sound fluency, letter naming fluency, decoding, comprehension and reading fluency, El Sol is another comprehensive assessment utilized for TBE students which addresses reading comprehension, beginning sounds and letter recognition in grades K-2. TCRWP reveals a wealth of data about our students, including the reader’s accuracy and self-corrections, comprehension, and fluency. Conferencing notes which allow us to give students another opportunity to teach them a skill or strategy that may need to be reinforced and provide them with next steps. These tools allow us to monitor student’s growth as learners throughout the year. The data gathered from utilizing these tools is used to plan our units of study, daily lessons, guided reading groups and our differentiated instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 48  Teacher teams/common planning meetings 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 8. We evaluate the success of our ELL programs by analyzing the data. Teachers receive the NYSESLAT and LAB-R data for the students they teach. They use this information to inform their instruction and use other assessments such as the NYS ELA, NYS Math, Interim Assessments, TCRWP Running Records, Baselines, Midlines, Endlines and other teacher assessments as well. They then form groups accordingly. As we plan utilizing our curriculum units, our emphasis is to provide the four modalities, listening, speaking, reading, and writing instruction to enable our students to make marked achievements on the NYSESLAT and ELA state exam. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Push -in and Pull-out and After school and Saturday programs 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 5. At PS/MS 95 our teachers use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework in the following ways: - Chunk instruction into shorter segments to allow for monitored breaks - Expand assignments over a longer period 􏰁 - Extend wait time for oral and written participation and responses - Provide small-group instruction - Pair or group ELL's with “buddies” who will assist with modeling and explaining tasks - Work one-on-one with student - Introduce and develop new vocabulary visually - Use bilingual dictionaries - Use technology and multimedia and graphic organizers - Provide ample repetition of language and tasks: repeat, restate, rephrase, review, reread - Encourage and allow for non-verbal responses such as pointing, nodding, pictures - Adjust expectations for language output (e.g. student speaks in words and phrases, simple present tense statements) - Allow shortened responses 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2. There are 33 percent of our ELL students that are Beginners/Entering and Low Intermediates/Emerging. We have 11 percent of our ELL's students that are High Intermediate/Transitioning and 56 percent of our ELL students are Advanced/Expanding. As the data shows, we have over 50 percent of our overall ELL's who are Advanced/Expanding. The bulk of them being in grade 1-4 which is 63% of the total Advanced/Expanding. Consequentially, at PS/MS 95, there is a great emphasis on reading and writing; therefore, our data shows that our ELL students are growing stronger. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teacher team meetings and data meetings Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 49  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1. Instruction at PS/MS 95 is delivered through the use of several models. We have five self-contained Transitional Bilingual classes in grades K-4. Our fourth grade bilingual class is an ICT model. We utilize push-in, pull-out and self-contained models for our ENL classes. In grades K-8, we have a push-in and pull-out model. In grades five through eight, we have one self-contained ENL class on each grade. The students are heterogeneously grouped on each grade. The classes have mixed proficiency levels. During the push-in model in grade K-4 teachers push in to the Literacy Block. During the pull-out model, teachers try to pull out during content subject areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2. When our NYSESLAT scores are received as well as the NYSITELL scores, we carefully plan for the students’ placement. Students in transitional bilingual classes receive Native Language Arts through the content of either science or social studies for 45-90 minutes per day depending upon the number of mandated units for the group of students. They receive 360 minutes of ENL and 90 minutes of ELA instruction. The students receiving ESL in the self-contained classes are grouped in their classes by their NYSITELL or NYSESLAT level. The students in the push-in and pull-out classes are also grouped in this manner in order for them to get the amount of minutes mandated by Part 154. The Beginner/Entering and Low Intermediate/Emerging groups receive 360 minutes of ENL, the High Intermediate/Transitioning and Advanced/Expanding groups receive 180 minutes of ENL Instruction all utilizing ENL Methodologies as their learning is scaffolded using our curriculum plans. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 3. The content areas in TBE classes are delivered through student’s native language, which in our case is Spanish, or in English utilizing ENL strategies. Teachers use ENL strategies such as scaffolding, TPR and differentiated instruction. Classrooms libraries include books in English as well as student’s native language in order to make content more comprehensible. Introduction and development of academic discourse such as hypothesizing, evaluating, inferring, predicting, and classifying all assist students through the English language transition time utilizing contextualized tasks that encourage thinking, reading, writing and speaking. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 4. ELL’s are appropriately evaluated in their native language by their classroom teacher. Students are administered a baseline in their native language. Teacher assesses the strengths and next steps for the students. Differentiated instruction is planned as well as guided reading groups. Students are also administered “El Sol” which allows teachers to also plan for their 2018-19 CEP 50  overall reading comprehension. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6. Daily instruction is differentiated for our ELL subgroups by planning carefully with individual student data and our curriculum units in order to help students achieve English language proficiency. Students who are SIFE, newcomers, receiving service four to six years, Long term ELL’s, or are identified as having special needs receive differentiated instruction from their classroom teacher. The teacher utilizes student data to plan groups that address the needs of the students. These students are also highly suggested t o attend our after school program for ELL's. This will aid our students in attaining on grade performance levels on the NYS ELA as well as the NYSESLAT. Students who attend this program have another opportunity to reinforce their reading and writing skills that are also part of our regular school day through smaller group instruction. There is a focus on enriching language development along with reading and writing strategies to ascertain that our ELL’s are provided with meaningful access to a rigorous academic program that reinforces the four modalities. Students with special needs who are ELL’s are also invited to the same program we offer the rest of our ELL population. An afterschool program will be offered for students in all ELL subgroups. The Bilingual Coordinator and classroom teacher will identify students for the program. Once our students become proficient on the NYSESLAT, we offer them transitional support if needed provided by the ESL teachers. We continue to review our data to group students as we provide them with differentiated instruction preparing them to be on grade level or above on the ELA and proficient on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 8. Teachers of ELL-SWD’s utilize the same reading and writing curriculum as the teachers on their same grade. The materials utilized such as short stories, read alouds are the same. The content area teachers utilize the same textbooks. The classroom libraries differ in the books being on the reading levels of the students since they should be on their independent reading level as assessed on Fountas & Pinnell. ELL's with disabilities tend to have difficulty with cognitive and metacognitive processes. These students generally are those who lack awareness of the skills, strategies, and resources that are needed to perform a task and who fail to use self-regulatory mechanisms to complete tasks. Teachers assist them by identifying and selecting appropriate strategies, and helping them organize information. Lessons are differentiatied and teachers confer with students to help them express concepts they are having difficulty with as well as address their language skills. We take a continuous data-driven approach to improving student performance, using the data and portfolio assessments to identify and address student needs 2018-19 CEP 51  and target areas for growth on a continuous basis. Ongoing assessments are both formal and informal. To meet and exceed City and Sate performance standards, students are administered periodic assessments. Item skills analyses are generated from periodic assessments to help teachers focus on specific student areas in need of extra instructional support and informs instructional decisions. Other assessments, both formal and informal, will also be used to drive instruction. These assessments will help teachers within all of the content areas make appropriate decisions for students as they utilize various instructional strategies and gather data to plan lessons and activities that address the individual student needs of ELL-SWD's. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 9. Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWD’s within the least restrictive environment by mainstreaming students, utilizing paraprofessional and providing mandated and at risk services in counseling, speech and language and SETTS when appropriate. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 10. Our targeted intervention programs for our ELL’s who are SIFE, newcomers, ELL’s receiving service four to six years, Long term ELL’s, or are identified as having special needs are serviced through utilizing small groups during guided reading, use of paraprofessional and through our after school program utilizing Title III funds. The program is two days per week for one and a half hours per day. For additional support, our ELL students will also be invited to attend our Saturday Academy that is tentatively scheduled for a total of ten Saturdays. Students will receive test prep for the ELA and NYS Math test. The language utilized is English since the program is an ENL program however; in most cases our Bilingual or ENL teachers who usually provide this service after school do speak Spanish. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 12. We will be providing a Saturday Academy in which ELL students will be invited as done in the past. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 13. The program that will be discontinued for ELL’s is the Tuesday/Thursday test prep program for ELA and Math. This was actually an after school program that was open to all of our below level students. Since we did not see a change in our data due to this specific program, we have decided to run the program on Saturdays that are closer to the testing dates. As we analyzed why we did not see results, we thought that on Saturdays, students can come in refreshed instead of doing this same work after school making it a long day for all involved. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 14. All ELL students are provided with equal access to our school programs. In the past, ELL’s were provided with being offered ELA after school twice per week and ENL twice per week. We have made some program changes after analyzing data for the programs offered, however our ELL population will now be invited to attend our Saturday Academy as the rest of our school population. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 15. The instructional materials used for our ELL population are our curriculum units that include the four modalities for our ELL’s, Story Town’s ELL component that is used in grades K-3 and Rigby. All of our classrooms that include ELL students have 2018-19 CEP 52  Smart boards. They are being used in an interactive manner with students. We also have purchased five sets of Rosetta Stone for ENL teachers to utilize with their beginning students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 16. Native language is supported in TBE through the content areas, through Native Language Arts, classroom libraries, glossaries, translated materials and buddy system. In our ENL classes it is supported through the use of classroom libraries, glossaries, translated materials, buddy system and in some cases with teacher who speaks student’s native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 17. The required services and materials provided for our ELL students are age appropriate. We utilize high interest low-level texts when needed. The Story Town component for ELL’s is age appropriate as well as the Rigby material we use. Our classroom libraries are leveled so that students are able to have easy access to their independent level reading books. The after school programs are also geared towards differentiating and utilizing materials that are age appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 15. The instructional materials used for our ELL population are our curriculum units that include the four modalities for our ELL’s, Story Town’s ELL component that is used in grades K-3 and Rigby. All of our classrooms that include ELL students have Smart boards. They are being used in an interactive manner with students. We also have purchased five sets of Rosetta Stone for ENL teachers to utilize with their beginning students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 18. The activities that are done at our school include the orientation process that takes place after school is in session. The other activities have been workshops provided for parents and their child informing parents of the state Exams their child will be taking and how they can assist as well. For example, the New York State ELA exam and the NYSESLAT. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 19. The language elective offered at our school is French as a foreign language once student is in middle school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? No Dual Language Program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. At the beginning of each year, all teachers and Paraprofessionals receive a “Pedagogical Needs Assessment” form to fill out and inform the administration of their pedagogical strengths, needs, and areas that are a work in progress. The feedback is reviewed by the administration and a pedagogical support plan is derived from the feedback provided by the teacher. The 2018-19 CEP 53  support(i.e., lesson planning, guided reading, how to effectively confer with students, data analysis - anlyzing student work, differentiated instruction, etc..) given to the teacher is provided by the coaches through a cycle and the administration monitors it. At the end of the cycle, teacher gives administration feedback in reference to the support provided. 2. Teachers who have students, who have just transitioned from elementary grades, are provided with internal and external professional development opportunities provided by our Network, BETAC, Office of ELL’s, Rigby, Common Planning, or other outside providers. The majority of teachers who have ELL students in their classes have received professional development on how to incorporate ESL methodologies into their daily workshops. Professional development around differentiation has also been provided for all teachers. Teachers are expected to differentiate the instruction during the workshop model framework in order to support students learning and ensure their academic growth. We emphasize basic skills, including phonics and early literacy development. ESL students, who are in monolingual classrooms, and are no longer ELA exempt after one year, receive extra support in literacy and language development so that they are able to meet grade level standards. ESL teachers push-in to the classroom and work with small groups to support the literacy curriculum. In addition, students participate in a test sophistication program in order to familiarize them with the ELA exam. We will be utilizing Ventures Education Systems Corporation for outside professional development. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 3. The following workshops are scheduled for the teachers of our ELL population: Differentiated Instruction, Planning for the Differentiated Classroom, Strategies for English Language Learners to develop spelling and vocabulary, Strategies for English Language Learners to develop reading comprehension and fluency and Understanding the process of literacy development for English Language Learners. In addition, our school's guidance counselors in particular our grades 6-8 guidance counselors provide on-going articulation workshops to parents to inform and assist them with the transition to High School. Also, guidance counselors push-in into the classrooms to observe and present High School information to the students as well as conducting one-on-one sessions to guide students and parents in selecting their school of choice that will best meet their social and educational needs. 4. Our school will continue to offer Jose P. training to our teachers. Professional development documentations will continuously be filed. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. The school has additional parent-teacher conferences that are planned during the school year. The parents are informed of their child's overall progress . Translation services are provided in-house by the school staff and administrators. Translation interpreters are available at all parent meetings and are available during parent/teacher and vital student/teacher conferences. The school sends translated communication to parents via an automated system called Globel Connect. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. Copies of students'report cards, progress reports, student portfolios are all available during any parent conference. Teacher's reach out to parents by placing phone calls informing them of their child's progress.(Parent Outreach) Parent 2018-19 CEP 54  coordinator surveys the parent population of our school and ensures that the parent needs are accomodated. Global Connect is used to reach out to parents informing them of events that take place throughout the year. 3. Our school offers ongoing workshops for all our parents. Our Parent Coordinator assists the Bilingual Coordinator with the compliance meetings for the Parents of our ELL population. This however is a population of parents that are usually more willing to attend professional development around various topics. We also reach out to parents to partake in our school wide learning walks arranged by the School Leadership Team. We offer on-going workshops dealing with various topics to our parents: How to improve parenting skills? How to talk with boys? Migration issues, ARIS, etc… All of these workshops are translated by parent coordinator or Assistant Principal. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Serge Marshall Davis, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/MS 95 The Sheila Mencher School DBN: 10X095 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Serge Marshall Davis Title Principal Omara Flores Assistant Principal Delis DeLeon Parent Coordinator Jessica Rivera ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Beth Kosofsky Teacher/Subject Area James Regan Teacher/Subject Area Michelle DiRenzo Brandi Nankivel Coach Coach Erin Ehrlich School Counselor Maribel Hulla Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x095 School Name: PS/MS 95 Sheila Mencher School Superintendent: Melodie Mashel The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school’s written and oral interpretation requirements are assessed during the registration process. We evaluate the languages of the parents and students to provide the necessary written and oral translation with the assistance of the parent coordinator, staff assistance based on parent's and student's native language needs. If there's a language that a building personnel cannot translate than we seek the assistance of external DOE personnel (i.e., translation unit). To facilitate this process, the school will input pertinent information(OTELE code) on ATS, emergency cards, HLIS. Our school is serving parents and students of the following native languages: English - 55% 2018-19 CEP 58  Spanish - 40% Other - 5% (Albanian, Arabic, Bengali,Bulgarian, Cantonese,Chinese, Fanti, French,Fulani, GA, German, Gujarati, Hindi, Italian, Mandarin, Russian, Tigre, Turkish, TWI, & Urdu). 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English, Spanish, and Arabic. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Monthly Parent Newsletters, Notifications letters for intervention/enrichment programs,Parent Association notifications letters for students and parents activities, School Leadership Team surveys and announcements, PK-K orientation packets, monthly calendar activities. Our monthly calendar, which informs parents of all school activities, goes home on the following dates: 9/8/15, 9/30/15, 10/30/15, 11/30/15,12/23/15, 1/29/16, 2/29/16, 3/31/16, 4/22/16, and 5/31/16. 2018-19 CEP 59  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-Teacher "Meet & Greet" Grade 1: 9/28/15 Grade 4: 10/1/15 Grades 7 and 8: 10/6/15 Grade 2: 9/29/15 Grade 5: 10/2/15 Grade 3: 9/30/15 Grade 6: 10/5/15 Parent-Teacher Conferences: November 5, 2015 and March 3, 2016 Monthly Parent Talk: 9/25/15, 10/23/15, 11/20/15, 12/18/15, 1/22/16, 2/19/16, 3/18/16,4/15/16,5/20/16,6/17/16 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS/MS 95 – The Sheila Mencher Van Cortlandt School will communicate whenever feasible with non-English speaking parents in their home language in order to support shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information 2018-19 CEP 60  about their child’s educational options and parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement. This will be monitored via careful screening at the time of student enrollment through blue emergencvy cards and Home Language Survey (HLS) to access all available services to ensure that language is not a barrier to building and enfranchising the school community for the ultimate academic success and well being of the child. In addition, our staff and faculty are aware of Chancellor's regulation A-663 and are also aware of school's translation protocols. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will utilize parent survey, feedback slip at meetings as well as establishing a comment/suggestion box in the offices of the Parent Coordinator and Parent Association. 2018-19 CEP 61 
