2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X111 School Name: P.S. 111 SETON FALLS Principal: CELINA GUTIERREZ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Seton Falls Elementary 11X111 321100010121 Pre K - 5 School Number (DBN): 3740 Baychester Avenue Bronx, NY 10466 718-881-2418 Phone Number: 718-405-5927 Fax: Celina Gutierrez Cgutier2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Celina Gutierrez Greg Weber Elise Moore Karen Lewis Caitlin Perrotta SharleneJohnson N/A N/A N/A District Information Jeremy Kabinoff Superintendent: 2750 Throop Avenue mross@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-519-2620 Phone Number: 718 519-2626 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Bronx Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx, NY 10462 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 828-7776 Phone Number: 718 828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Celina Gutierrez Greg Weber Karen Lewis Monique Adams SharleneJohnson N/A N/A Courtney Henry *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ElisaMoore Member/ Parent/Co-president Caitlin Perrotta Sharon Anderson Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher /Chairperson Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Paraprofessional Member/ Paraprofessional Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Seton Falls Elementary School, PS111X is a school community dedicated to maximizing our students' potential in their attainment of high standards both academically and socially. Through the implementation of the Common Core State Standards we cultivate a rigorous, safe, and nurturing environment so that our children can be prepared for success in a culturally diverse, technologically changing, global society. Our educational efforts continue to expand into the students' homes, encouraging, and supporting our family of critical thinkers and lifelong learners. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to focus on developing teacher pedagogy and cultivating a school culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. The school community will engage in developing an approach for establishing a positive school culture with interventions designed and intended to support the academic achievement and socio-emotional flourishing of all students. As such the school will continue to foster partnerships with Thrive NYC for mental health services and the Office of Community Schools to further develop and support shared leadership to organize resources so that academics, social services and other supports are integrated into the fabric of the school. This year we will expand our partnership with Thrive NYC to also include ParentCorpsNYU to build on the strengths of culturally-diverse families and help the school engage parents as partners in helping children succeed in Pre-K. For the 2018-2019 school year we will partner with the Eagle Academy Foundation to build the capacity of educators and school leaders in order to be better equipped to work with and support the needs of male students of color and all under-served students particularly those not meeting proficiency levels. Continued and ongoing collaborations will include partnerships with the following; New Teacher Center, to accelerate the effectiveness of new teachers and build teacher capacity through through a cohesive teacher induction program Thinking Maps to equip administrators, teachers and students with the tools to become lifelong successful thinkers, problem solvers and decision makers Teaching Matters for Early Reading Matters to train and develop teachers and leaders in order to ensure that k-3 students achieve grade level reading expectations The 92nd Street Y and EDU Music programs to provide exposure to the arts Pretty Brown Girls mentoring program Cardinal Spellman High School student volunteer/tutoring programs Pure Food Kids nutrition and healthy living program provides students with skills and knowledge for a healthy lifestyle The LeAp STEM program focuses on building science concepts in students by using hands on, activity-based instruction 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  R.A.I.N Eastchester Neighborhood Senior Center intergenerational program to bring children and older adults together in a variety of ways to build relationships and benefit the community 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We are a Pre-K through Grade 5 Elementary School. There are a total of seven Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ICT) classes; one on each grade. In addition, there are 7 self-contained special education classes serving students in grades K through 5, of which four are 12:1:1 classes. Our general education English Language Learners are serviced through a push-in/pull-out model and are grouped together in one class per grade. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on 2018 Principal Performance Observation and the 2018 Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Self-Reflection High expectations - "High expectations are communicated to the students and staff through the focus on Common Core Learning Standards for the development of tasks, rubrics, and assessments. Parents and guardians are made aware of the high expectations for the students through parents newsletters,PTA Meetings,Pupil Path/Skedula, Curriculum Night, Open School Week, Parent-Teacher Roundtables, DAD Initiative, Go Math, MyOn, and additional community initiatives, as well as, on-lineparent engagement activities. Students are reminded of and guided towards college and career readiness by the exposure to the school’s". Teacher Feedback - "Teacher observations are analyzed based on the domains using the Rating Distribution by Evaluator and Domain/Component located within the Advance Observation Dashboard. This is done to identify areas where there is a need for support in a specific area. Feedback is provided to teachers based on low inference notes and the HEDI Scale of the Danielson Rubric. Teachers participated in reflective teaching practices by taking part in Peer inter-visitations of colleagues within their grades and the grades above and below the current grade they are teaching when appropriate. During peer intervisitations teachers were asked to complete an Inter-visitation Debrief Tool. The tool is utilized to assist in guiding the discussion during the debrief as well." Monitoring and Revising - "With regard to monitoring and tracking at the school level, the Principal and her Assistant Principals utilize a number of data sources to assess their progress toward a number of their initiatives. For example, the school places large emphasis on parental engagement and utilizes a number of surveys to, not only, gauge attendance, but feedback as well. Via surveys, the Principal enables all parents to respond toward what is working and what can be done better. In addition, the Principal more than doubled her parental survey responses via the School's Learning Environment Survey through her analysis of feedback ascertained from prior parental feedback forms. The Principal and Assistant Principals monitor their equity work by making use of the Cultural Proficiency Receptivity Scale. The scale is comprised of 6 statements that are rated on a 1-7 Likert scale." Learning Environment - "The principal has created an equity team in alignment to the District's mission and vision around equity and excellence for all. Members of the school's equity team have, either, participated in Critically Conscious Educators Rising Series, Beyond Diversity and/or Yale Ruler Training. In addition, the Principal has partnered with a Coach from Australia (Racially Representing White) to enable staff to hear the equity focus from a racially different lens. As a means to promoting the equity work." 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  The feedback also indicates that our challenges are in the following areas: Assessment - Although the school uses a number of common summative and formative assessments to support differentiation of learning and adjustments to the curricula, more attention needs to paid toward capturing student understanding while the classroom lesson is taking place. In all classroom visits, more emphasis on capturing whether or not students are on track was limited. For the future, begin to institute the attribute card system along with a student/standard tracker to support how to capture the students' academic behaviors. Teacher Teams - For the future, begin to work with your teachers and implement a book study on “Data Wise” and engage your Assistant Principals and staff through the “Data Wise” processes. In order to delve further into the teaming process. Key areas of focus for this school year are based on feedback from data sources that include the MOTP, Learning Environment Survey, student data as dictated by Fountas and Pinnell and iReady, teacher data as dictated by teacher ADVANCE and summative conferences, etc. Our key areas of focus this year will include : -Continued strategically utilize data to plan and implement challenging tasks and activities with multiple entry points to cognitively engage students in higher order thinking and discussion in order to deepen students understanding of the content - Improve teacher's content knowledge, pedagogy and use of data to increase student achievement and success - Promote and enhance parental/family empowerment to support student success - Integrate social and emotional learning to promote a positive school culture and climate - 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. Vertical teams are organized by content area. All teachers collaborate on a vertical team in order to support the work their horizontal team. Vertical teams meet once per week and horizontal teams meet three times per week for planning and inquiry work. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X111 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 677 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 130 130 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 37 35 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 88.5% % Reduced Lunch 6.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 35.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.22 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 78% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No N/A 59 58 90.2% 3.1% 27.0% 60.7% 1.3% 0.9% 4 5% 8.3 30.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School No Focus Subgroups Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A N/A X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the 2017-2018 summative feedback for the Principal Performance Review Measure of Leadership Practice, the schools' strengths include the following; Strategically allocating resources to support the school vision and goals   Developing a learning environment to support equity for all students  Communicating high expectations to students staff and families  Implementation of CCLS aligned curriculum with opportunities for project based learning In order to move to sustain and continue to grow in these areas we will: - Continue to utilize CCLS and curriculum aligned lessons and student friendly rubrics across all subject areas - Continue to engage in analyzing student work protocols in order to determine the learning gaps and areas of highest instructional needs of the students 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  - Continue to provide students with actionable feedback highlighting a 'glow' and a 'grow' for next steps that enable students to improve their performance - Continue to engage parents in workshops to support them in helping their children at home and provide opportunities to enrich and/or enhance family living - Integrate social and emotional learning to promote a positive school culture and climate - Build the capacity of educators and school leaders in order to be better equipped to work with and support the needs of male students of color and all under-served students particularly those not meeting proficiency levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year, teachers will continue to engage in ongoing professional development to improve use of ongoing formative assessment tools to monitor and track student learning in order to adjust curriculum and instruction that will promote high levels of student engagement as measured by a 3% increase in students meeting individual end-of-year Growth Targets and an increase of 10% of teachers improving in HEDI rating for component 3d:( Using Assessment in Instruction) by June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will continue to engage in professional learning sessions to: Teachers Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Weekly during common planning and Monday Vertical Team time/inquiry time Teachers, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist, MOSL team, School leaders, New Teacher Center, Universal Literacy Coach, Reading Matters Coach from Sept 2018-June 2019 November 2018 March 2019 June 2019 All students including ELLs and SWD. All families. Teachers, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist School Leaders, MOSL Committee, SBST, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, NTC, ULC Weekly from September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist, School Leaders, NTC, ULC  Build capacity of grade-level teacher leaders to guide teacher teams focused on student performance  Use Diagnostic data to differentiate and inform all  instruction. Learn how to gauge students’ performance as they progress through Instruction.  Utilize progress monitoring data from Standards Mastery or Growth Monitoring to adjust instruction to meet individual student needs. Teachers will regularly engage students and families in data conversations and goal setting to establish individualized pathways for learning. .Teachers will engage all students in a BOY, MOY and EOY goal setting/data conference .Staff members will engage parents of most at-risk students in extended data conference twice a year Teacher teams will engage in lesson studies to identify a problem of practice, establish a common goal and related research questions they will explore. Teacher teams Teachers will continue to engage in inter-visitations to identify key learning for implementation of effective strategies and practices that can be shared across the school. Vertical lead teachers will continue to attend Algebra for All, Reading Matters and District level PD to turn key and support horizontal teams. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Instructional coaches and parent coordinator will continue to engage families in classroom workshops focused on schoolwide initiatives (TC Writing/Reading, Math Exemplar, Guided Reading, Thinking Maps) resulting in supporting and understanding student progress towards expectations. Parents are invited to participate in small groups in order to maximize learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Allot time for professional learning with TC Writing/Reading, Metamorphisis and District level outside training. - Allocate funding for teacher coverage for trainings. -Allocate funding for Metamorhisis consultants, iReady consultants and Thinking Maps consultants and progress monitoring systems such as iReady and Skedula. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end February 2019, 5% of teachers as measured by Advance dashboard will demonstrate growth in (3d) Using Assessment in Instruction and (1a) Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy and the MOY assessments will demonstrate a 3% increase in the number of students meeting the mid-year growth targets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance dashboard data MOY Assessments (F&P, iReady) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A X N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As per the 2017-2018 DTSDE Reflection some barriers that have kept the school from being successful in this area include     Inconsistent use of data in identifying student areas of need Inconsistent use of the system for school referral and support Inconsistent systems for monitoring and responding to students Limited professional development to build adult capacity In order to grow in this area, we will:  Develop a cohesive vision and set of values alongside all stakeholders to develop and realize the long-term vision and mission  Engage the school community in ongoing professional learning and practices to support student social and emotional developmental health (Yale Ruler) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20   Ensure that all staff know and use practices and protocols for referral and support for all students to address  social and emotional developmental health. Improve the mechanisms for staff to use data to identify areas of need connected to student social and emotional developmental health Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year, staff will continue to engage in professional development for using appropriate tools and techniques to build capacity in managing student behavior as measured by a 5% reduction in student incidents as evidenced through OORS reports by June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implement Yale Ruler social emotional intelligence program. Staff, faculty, Students and families September 2018- June 2019 Establish and implement rituals and routines to support a strong sense of community Establish and implement effective school wide discipline strategies Implement a school wide discipline plan that includes school wide classroom rules, expectations for conduct, citizenship, and a rewards system for all students. Revisit and re-establish schoolwide PBIS Visit and collaborate with other schools for successful implementation of PBIS Expand the PBIS Team to include families that will develop an effective and transparent process to purposefully evaluate and adjust our overarching systems that support and sustain social and emotional developmental health. All students including SWD and ELLs Weekly from September 2018- June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) PBIS Team and School Leaders, Dean of Students, Guidance counselor, SIT Team, parents, teachers, paraprofessionals, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist, NYC, SBST PBIS Team and School Leaders, Dean of Students, Guidance counselor, SIT Team, parents, teachers, paraprofessionals, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist, NYC Thrive consultant School leaders will engage the entire school community in a shared vision to develop students habits and principles for personal and All school staff, all students, and families September 2018- June 2019 Yale Ruler Coach, PBIS Team and School Leaders, Dean of Students, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  interpersonal effectiveness, such as responsibility, vision, integrity, teamwork, and collaboration. Parent coordinator and counselor will conduct parent workshops to support anti-bully, appropriate social media behavior and socially acceptable behaviors. Engage staff, faculty and families in utilizing school data to identify an equity focus in order to narrow the achievement gap for male student of color. Conduct an annual needs assessments to determine student academic, health, social and emotional needs in order to analyze and implement consistent protocols for additional behavior supports, especially at the targeted and intensive levels. Guidance counselor, SIT Team, parents, teachers, paraprofessionals, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist, NYC Thrive consultant, School Equity Team September 2018- June 2019 All school staff, all students including SWD and ELLs PBIS Team and School Leaders, Guidance counselor, SIT Team, parents, teachers, paraprofessionals, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist, NYC Thrive consultant 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. - Partner with 21st Century to provide students and families with expanded learning time, health and wellness services, enhanced family and community engagement and targeted attendance improvement strategies. From September 2018 to June 2019 we will collaborate with the office for community schools to implement a transformative model of family engagement to create a strong partnership with families and community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Student Incentives - Yale Ruler Training PD - Teacher Coverage (Substitute Teachers) - Eagle Academy Foundation support and PD Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will reduce the number of student incidents as measured by a 5 % decrease in the number of OORS incidents and positive student responses in surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In January 2019, the PBIS Team will complete the Team Implementation Checklist (TIC) progress monitoring tool used to assess Universal (Tier 1) implementation in order to:  Examine their Tier I implementation fidelity – Are we doing what we said we would do?  Identify Tier I implementation elements as in place, partially in place or not in place to inform action planning – What are our strengths that we can acknowledge? What could we do to improve?  Disaggregate mid-year OORS data  Survey staff and students Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. SOP(s) Addressed X 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards N/A (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. N/A 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. N/A 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the Quality Review conducted in January/February 2017, we received a rating of "Proficient" on indicator 4.2. - Distributive leadership through vertical teams ensures that the majority of teachers are engaged in professional collaborations where they have a wide latitude in supporting school goals. In order to move to "Well Developed" within this indicator we will: - Continue to build capacity through distributive leadership structures (vertical and horizontal teacher teams). - Engage in analyzing student work protocols in order to determine the learning gaps and areas of highest instructional needs of the students. - Continue to engage teacher teams in inter-visitation protocols within the school and our district, focused on best teacher practices resulting in shared improvements. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year, teachers teams will continue to customize unit and daily lesson plans and curriculum to CCLS, utilize Thinking Maps to engage students in higher order thinking and discussion, that will result in 3% increase in students meeting individual end-of-year Growth Targets. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Enhance structures for professional learning to engage instructional staff in horizontal and vertical teams including teachers who serve SWD and ELLs. Teachers and paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019 Utilize inter-visitations to collectively improve teaching practices in an effort to ensure that every classroom becomes a place of rich and valuable learning for all students. Select teachers lead the schools efforts through three common elements of improvement: classroom observation, an improvement strategy, and a network of educators. Teachers and paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019 Continue inter-visitations by Teacher Teams to create a timeline of the actions that will lead to the teacher’s identified goals. They also create a plan to monitor progress and analyze the success of the next steps in positively impacting student learning. Teachers and families September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, paraprofessionals, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist, School leaders, NTC, ULC, RSE-TASC. Teachers, paraprofessionals, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist, School leaders, NTC, ULC. Teachers, paraprofessionals, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist, School leaders, NTC, ULC. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Content based vertical teacher teams will organize and host instructional focused share fairs. Teachers will continue to host instructional visits for parents in small groups to model strategies used in classrooms. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  - Allot time for meetings with mentors/mentees, Universal Literacy Coach, and to attend outside training. - Allocate funding for teacher coverage for sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, we will utilize student mid-year assessments (Fountas & Pinell, iReady, Performance Tasks) to measure student growth against beginning of year baseline assessments resulting in a 3% increase in students meeting individual mid-year growth targets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instructional Rounds / Inter-visitation Advance dashboard data Beginning Of the Year, Mid-Year and End-Of-Year Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed X N/A N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the Quality Review conducted in January/February 2017, we received a rating of "Proficient" on indicator 3.1. Establish a coherent vision of school improvement that is reflected in a short list of focused, data-based goals that are tracked for progress and are understood and supported by the entire school community In order to move to "Well Developed" within this indicator we will: - Expand the instructional cabinet to include more stakeholders in developing, planning, and reflecting on established goals and the pathways to address them. - Utilize data to track progress towards meeting the schoolwide goals resulting in improvement of teacher pedagogy. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 schoolyear, we will continue to engage students and families in the understanding and utilization of data to collectively support and improve student achievement and well- being as evidenced by a 5% increased in students meeting End-Of-the-Year learning targets and benchmarks measured through iReady. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School leaders engage SLT around utilizing data sources to establish and monitor progress of school goals for the SCEP. SLT Sept. 2018 School leaders will provide consistent and calibrated feedback to teachers aligned to the school improvement documents. Teachers Nov. 2018 Feb. 2019 June 2019 Every 6 weeks beginng Sept. 2018 Establish a more inclusive instructional cabinet to include more stakeholders in developing, planning, and reflecting on established goals and the pathways to address them. Teachers and paraprofessionals September 2018 Develop a shared vision and mission statement in collaboration with a representative group of staff, families, students and some affiliated partnerships that will be uniformly seen, heard, and known across the entire school community and affiliated partnerships. Teachers, paraprofessionals and parents. September 2018 School leaders, teachers, paraprofessionals, community members, and families School leaders, NTC mentors, ULC, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist School leaders, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist, teachers, and Parent Coordinator, NTC Mentors, ULC School leaders, Instructional Coach/Data Specialist, teachers, Parent Coordinator, NTC, ULC, community members, and families 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  We will continue to develop parent leadership through our SLT as well as expand parent participation in other school teams such as the attendance team, the PBIS team and ESL team. From September 2018 to June 2019 parents and staff members will meet monthly in school wide teams to collectively lead in the attainment of school wide goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Allocate funding for substitute teachers to secure time and scheduling of common planning time to unpack and analyze data. Provide per session funding for additional planning and collaboration. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, the SLT and other school teams will conduct a self-assessment of the schools progress in meeting the goals outlined in the 2018-2019 SCEP and other school improvement documents to determine growth towards meeting growth targets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Beginning Of the Year, Mid-Year and End-Of the-Year data results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed N/A X N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the Quality Review conducted in January/February 2017, we received a rating of "Developing" on indicator 3.4. School leaders and staff are developing expectations that are connected to a path to college and career readiness. Teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations for all students with feedback and advisement. In order to move to "Proficient" within this indicator we will: - Monitor and track Skedula/Pupilpath usage for teachers and families in order to ensure reciprocal communication between families and school. - Continue to engage families in classroom workshops focused on schoolwide initiatives (TC Writing/Reading, Math Exemplar, Guided Reading, Thinking Maps) resulting in supporting and understanding student progress towards expectations. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. From September to June of 2018-19 school year, school leaders will monitor monthly parent and teacher use of PupilPath/Skedula and parent other outreach for increased reciprocal communication with families resulting in a 5% increase of students meeting end-of-the-year learning targets and benchmarks as measured by iReady. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers, Parent Coordinator, and School Leaders will regularly engage families in data conversations to communicate progress, learning goals, and a pathway for reciprocal support. Students and families Nov. 2018 March 2019 All stakeholders will utilize online supports such as PupilPath/Skedula for students, parents, teachers and administrators to engage in consistent reciprocal communication. Students and families May-June 2019 weekly Collaborate with families to improve attendance of students with chronic absenteeism. Families weekly Employ strategies for minimizing impact of mitigating circumstances to support Students in Temporary Housing (STH), students with health Issues, over-age, students with social-emotional issues, students with special needs. Students and families weekly Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers, School Leaders, Parent Coordinator, SBST, and guidance counselor Teachers, School leaders, and Parent Coordinator Attendance Committee Attendance Committee, SBST, Guidance Counselor, School Leaders, Equity Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 21st century Community Learning Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Student Incentives - Partnerships with outside organizations - Allocate funding for Skedula Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, we will analyze data trends for usage of online communication systems such as skedula/PupilPath as well as all attendance reports for the tracking and monitoring of chronically absent students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PupilPath monthly reports, OORS, and all Attendance Monitoring Reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas and Pinnell levels school-wide MOSL assessments Grade 3-5 State exam scores and summative assessments Grade 3-5 State exam scores and summative assessments MOSL assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Leveled Literacy Instruction (LLI), Kindervention, I- Ready, Fundations double dose Test taking strategies and intervention Small group instruction 5 times per week in groups of 4-7 students. Small groups instruction twice per week in groups of 6 or less. Mathematics Readers, STAMS, I-Ready Small group 5 times per week in groups of 4-7 students. Test taking strategies and intervention Small groups instruction twice per week in groups of 15 or less. During the school day After school on Wednesdays and Thursdays Saturdays During the school day After school on Wednesdays and Thursdays Saturdays During the school day During the school day Science Grade 4 State Exams and Summative assessments LEAP STEM program small group Science Lab experiences tutoring Social Studies Summative Assessments Content reading and writing Content Reading and writing small group tutoring 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Field experiences At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) OORS Mentoring Programs Group counseling During school day BIP FBA IEP ie;Pretty Brown Girls mentoring High School Mentors After-school 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have approximately 25 students in temporary housing for the 2017-18 school year. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide at risk counseling, school supplies and uniforms, and mental health services based on student and family needs assessments. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school consults with the HR director to recruit highly qualified and appropriately licensed staff. The school has secured a full time teacher specialist/coach. The school is in partnership with New Teacher Center (NTC). Early career teachers are assigned a specially trained NTC mentor for a minimum of 2 years to focus on developing their craft in alignment with the standards and teacher framework. Other outside consultants are utilize to differentiate support for teachers as informed by ADVANCE observations and teachers self assessment and reflection. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school works very closely with the district support staff such as the JESSA to engage in ongoing professional development aligned to the shifts in teacher practice. In addition the school is in collaborative partnerships with other schools in the district for specific initiatives such as Teachers College Writing and Thinking Maps. All teachers engage in weekly professional development aligned to CCLS, and Danielson’s framework for teaching. The administration engages in regular training with a talent coach from ADVANCE to enhance practices for evaluating teacher effectiveness. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). The school has 3 full day pre-k classes of which one is an ICT class. The pre-k staff engages in all teacher team meetings to align curriculum to the CCLS. All IEP pre-k students receive services as required. The school provides monthly parent workshops for Pre-K and Kindergarten families to promote literacy and math proficiency as well as social development. We offer 2 annual parenting workshop series, (Common Sense Parenting), to equip parents with appropriate strategies to support whole child development. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The schools MOSL committee collaborated with the administration in deciding on the schools adoption of the Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessment system. Other assessments measures are guided through the math and literacy curriculums that the school has selected. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal 680,542.00 Funding not available $132,070 128,031.00 X X X X 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42 Column B Section Reference(s) 12, 15, 17, 21,23 12, 15, 17, 21,23  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 11,200.00 0 3,820,436.00 X X X 17, 21, 23 17, 21, 23 12, 15, 17, 21,23 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Seton Falls Elementary, PS 111 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Seton Falls Elementary, PS 111 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Seton Falls Elementary, PS 111 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA): I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? CS strategy is integrated into academic instruction through test prep and homework help Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2018 5% of students who regularly attend ELT through the community school after school program will demonstrate an increase in achievement as measured by MOSL and end-of the year benchmarks and targets. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Students with poor attendance and/or low academic performance and achievement will receive academic supports along with a balance of sports and arts experiences to enhance and connect their learning. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership The Leadership program Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Target Population grade 2-5 students Scope of Service Extended learning Time Sports and Arts SY18-19 SMART Goal To increase student achievement through 3%engagement in arts, sports and academics as measured by iReady and MOSL Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52 Supplies, textbooks, human resources Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X P/F Set-aside X 21st Century PTA Funded SIG Grant Achievement Funding School C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. We will collectively monitor attendance data that is input into Youthservices data base in order to intervene and promote success. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The leadership program provides sports and arts experiences such as basketball, soccer, cheerleading, chorus and visual arts. The academic component includes test prep, health and fitness, and music appreciation. The program also includes opportunity for student leadership development through student council and Pretty brown Girls. All students will participate in vision screening and students diagnosed with vision impairments will be provided with free glasses 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  of choice. STEAM learning opportunity will be offered to expose students to coding and video game design. Parents and students in grades 1 will have the opportunity to participate in learning a second language through the Bilingual Birdies program. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The 21st Century grant will fund instructors for sports, arts and academic services as well as glasses, STEAM program, Bilingual Program and Health and Wellness for students and families. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The program will run from October 31-2017 to June 14, 2018 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 2 2 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: 2017 NYSESLAT results indicate that 54% of our grade 1-5 ELLs are at the Transitioning and Expanding levels with high scores in the Speaking modality. We will provide needed support in Listening, Reading, and Writing modalities to help them progress to the Commanding Level. We will address this need through a before school program for grade 1-2 ELLs at the Transitioning and Expanding levels that will meet 4 days per week from 7:00AM-7:50AM. We will also have an afterschool program for grade 3-5 ELLs at the Transitioning and Expanding levels that will meet 2 days per week from 2:30PM-4:30PM. Both programs will focus on drama and visual arts. The program will utilize the research-based practice of combining the arts with all modalities. We will align instruction to the Common Core Learning Standards with appropriate scaffolds and ENL strategies. Activities will include read alouds, reader’s theater, vocabulary building, writing for authentic purposes, and iPAD apps (such as Imagine Learning) to foster reading comprehension. Both programs will meet from October to May (Grade 1-2 for 100 sessions; grade 3-5 for 50 sessions). The number of students per ENL teacher will be 15. Instruction will be provided in English by one ESL teacher for each program. Materials that will be utilized include grade appropriate fictional and informational texts and a vocabulary building curriculum (Building Vocabulary by Teacher Created Materials). All records of attendance (for teachers and students), contact with parents, student work, and program notification in parents’ preferred languages will be kept on file in the ENL department. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our ENL teachers will continue their professional growth by participating in the following: 1) Each ENL teachers will attend a Bureau of Education & Research (BER) seminar that focuses on reading (What’s NEW in Children’s Books and Creative, Powerful Strategies for Using Them in Program & CLOSE READING STRATEGIES: Practical Ways to Help Students Use Analytical Strategies to Increase Their Reading Skills). The information learned at the seminars will be turn-keyed to the rest of the ENL Team. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  Part C: Professional Development 2) As a team, the ENL teachers will use the RTI for ELLs resources on the NYCDOE website to create an inquiry group led by the ENL Coordinator and conducted during the 35 minute professional work component on alternating Tuesdays beginning in January 2019. 3) The ENL teachers will participate in professional development offered by the DELLSS during the 2018-19 school year. The ENL teachers will also conduct workshops during the year to share best practices, differentiation strategies, and scaffolds with teachers who have ELLs in their classrooms. Our school will provide the PD during the 35 minute professional work component on alternating Tuesdays beginning in December 2018. All records such as agendas, sign-in sheets and hand-out materials will be kept on file. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We will offer the following parent workshops/events specifically for parents of ELLs from October to May (tentative Dates indicated): 1) ENL classes for Parents- Wednesdays & Fridays 2:30-3:30 plus half hour each day for planning purposes. The class will be taught by TESOL certified teachers utilizing adult learning theory and TESOL strategies. Classes will meet from October to May. (per session needed) 2) 11/19/18-Immigration Workshop-9:00-12:00-Presentations by Mayor's Office of Immigrant Affairs and NYCDOE Office of Continuing Education. IDNYC host site for parents to apply on 4-6 Saturdays for a 3-hour window. (per session needed) 3) 12/10/18-(separate sessions for K-2 & 3-5)-2:30-3:15pm-How to Help Your Child Succeed in School – This will cover basic homework help as well as how to support their children if their English skills are limited. The book, Parent’s Homework Dictionary, will be distributed to parents in English and Spanish. 4) March 2019-2:30-3:15pm-NYS Exams – This workshop will cover what the state ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT will assess and how parents can help their children prepare for these exams. 5) May 2019-10:00-4:00pm-Cultural Event: Brooklyn Bridge/Grimaldi Restaurant trip – This event will include parents with their children so as to engage parents in their child's learning in an encouraging manner. We will do a self-guided walking tour of the iconic Brooklyn Bridge (with views of Manhattan skyline) and have lunch at the famous Grimaldi Restaurant. ENL teachers will continuously point out literacy connections during the trip. (per session needed) 6) ELL Parent Conference Trip (Spring)– ENL teachers will serve as guides to the annual ELL Parent Conference in New York City. We will actively encourage parents to attend, register them as a group, and travel with them to the event. Parents will be notified of workshops/events via letters (with a tear-off slip) translated into home languages and sent home with the children. The letter will also advise parents that interpreters will be made available, if needed. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ N/A Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Seton Falls Elementary Borough Bronx School Number 111 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Celina Gutierrez Coach Laura Silberman ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Marguerite Douglas Teacher/Subject Area Gina Jones Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Devin Schwartz Superintendent Meisha Ross-Porter Assistant Principal Eduardo Calderon Coach School Counselor Robin Cuthbertson Parent Elisa Moore Parent Coordinator Anita Burrell Field Support Center Staff Member Vanessa MacDonna Almonte Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 671 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59 Total number of ELLs 53 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.90%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data: The formative assessments used to guide instructional planning for ELLs are iReady assessments, teacher-created assessments, Spanish Lab (when applicable), the NYSITELL, Base/Middle/End year assessments, Math Performance Task, Periodic Assessments, GO Math, Fundations, MOSL, 3-5 NYS Periodic Assessment, Teacher’s College Reading & Writing units of study and Fountas & Pinnell assessment system. These ongoing assessments are an integral part of each class and of each ELL student. They are used to determine movement toward meeting the Common Core State Standards. Formative and benchmark assessments are administered during the school year to support instructional intervention and are intended to enhance ELL student achievement. Grades 3-5 continue to use F & P throughout the school year, as well iReady, portfolios, and teacher-created exams to assess 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  student growth. Grades K-2 continue to use F & P throughout the school year, as well as Fundations assessments, teacher-created assessments, and portfolios to assess student progress. Early literacy skills include letter name identification, letter sound-symbol correspondence, sight word recognition, and comprehension skills. If the student has these skills in his/her native language, we help him/her transfer these skills into the English language. Entering and Emerging ELLs also utilize the Imagine Learning Literacy software program that individualizes instruction and provides native language support. We are also able to assess student progress in early literacy skills via iReady and Imagine Learning. The data helps us assess not only ELL students, but our school’s progress as well. We can determine if we are giving our ELL population enough support. This helps to inform our instructional plan by informing us which areas need new strategies, determining how we can help the student develop better skills, exploring whether the child should be placed in a different setting, and deciding our next steps. Data from F & P helps determine the needs of the ELL students’ as well as his/her strengths. We can determine the level of reading skills, vocabulary, and comprehension skills based on this assessment. An instructional plan is created based on information derived from the above-mentioned assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support our instructional plan for the ELLs, our school has horizontal and vertical teams to assess the progress students make in content areas in each grade and across grade levels. We also have a testing team to assess the results of periodic assessments as well and assess formative assessments. The curriculum team addresses the needs of not only the SWDs but ELLs and ELLs who happen to also be SWDs by creating plans that incorporates the needs of ELLs. During the Monday PDs, time is allotted for ENL teachers to assess the needs of their students based on the assessments used to determine the needs of the students. In addition, we have Saturday Title III academy, Wednesday and Thursday Title III after school academy to provide students with the interventions needed acquire the language and work towards meeting the demands of the Common Core State Standards. Our ELL/Special Education coordinator attends monthly liaison meetings that examine the needs of the students and assess which best practices are beneficial to ELLs and ELLs that are SWDs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Evaluation and assessment are continuous and drive our instruction. The summative assessments that are used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need are the TCWRP writing baseline, MOSL, Fountas and Pinnell, teacher-created writing tasks, GO Math, NYSESLAT, 3-5 Periodic Assessments, math periodic assessments and Fundations unit assessment. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We will address the results of the data by assessing which students fall in Entering and Emerging levels on the NYSESLAT along with the EDAT to provide after school intervention programs for these specific groups of students. The instruction will be tailored to meet the demands of both the NYSESLAT and the Common Core State Standards. Additionally, we will provide periodic NYSESLAT test simulations to assess changes in their performance levels to see if the students are making progress. During the second half of the school year, we will have Saturday test-prep academy to provide additional support for these students along with the students that are performing at Transitioning and Expanding levels. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The data that is derived from the NYSESLAT, Fountas and Pinnell, and other assessments provides information on struggling ELLs . During the school year we will analyze student performance and group students into heterogeneous groups and group students for small group instruction for push-in and pull-out periods. ENL teachers provide support to classroom teachers in order to target ELL needs on a daily basis. The way in which we guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework provides rigorous and evidenced based instruction through the use of TCRWP, Fundations, iReady and GO math as strong Tier 1 supports. We then utilize the results of the Tier 1 supports to provide support in Tier 2 instruction which takes place in the classroom and is based on the needs of the students by targeting instruction through activities in after school programs that builds on core instruction. Lastly for Tier 3, we provide Saturday academy for students who need a more individualized approach to learning in groups of 2-3 students every 4 weeks. Based on the formative assessments, such as F& 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  P, iReady and teacher-created exams, ELLs who continue to struggle with curricular content will be provided Tier 3 interventions. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Most of our ELL population is Instructionally Disadvantaged, and are still at the “Emerging/Transitioning” level. Our General Education ELLs develop their Speaking skills more rapidly than reading and writing skills or Listening skills (without visual support), which is evident by the number of students who score higher on that part of the NYSESLAT. Additionally, our ELLs that are also SWDs, struggle with the writing and reading parts of the NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? For the upcoming school year, we will use the Data Analysis Tool to provide PDs to all teachers and inform them of which domain the ELLs perform well in the and the areas they need support in. We will use the data of the previous NYSESLAT and the results of the 2017 NYSESLAT to do inquiry work on how to move students and to assess which students are not making progress to create an invention plan for them at the beginning of the school year. We will monitor their progress as a way to see if the adjustments we have made in the program is working. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At P.S. 111, students are grouped heterogeneously in grades K-5. Most of the students are placed in general education classes on each grade level. Some of the ELL students are also Students with Disabilities and based on their IEPs they are placed in Integrated Cooperative Team Teaching classes or 12:1:1 classes. The students are placed in the class based on their LEP status and grade, they typically make up about a 1/4 of the students in the class. A licensed ENL teacher plans collaboratively with the classroom teacher of that general education class and pushes in (integrated ENL) and pulls out groups (standalone ENL) in order to provide the mandated services and minutes. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes by first going onto ATS and printing the RLAT to see the students’ proficiency levels and that will determine how many mandated minutes they should receive. We also use the ELL Data Analysis Tool to target individual student needs by subject area. Additionally, we enter the information onto STARS to display how we are providing the students with the mandated minutes. All ENL teachers are knowledgeable regarding the mandated time for each group of ELL students. Entering and Emerging level 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  students receive 360 mandated minutes, Transitioning and Expanding level students receive 180 minutes and commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated instruction. The program model is push-in with a pull-out supplement, when necessary. Explicit ENL and ELA instructional minutes are delivered in the Free Standing ESL program, based on the score each student receives on the NYSESLAT. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The program we currently have at P.S. 111 is the Freestanding ENL program. Although instruction is delivered entirely in English in all content areas, the use of visuals, manipulatives, glossaries, dictionaries, iPads and small group instruction is used to assist the students in meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The emphasis on content vocabulary development are considered during the planning and delivery of lessons so that ELLs are better equipped to access classroom instruction. In order to ensure academic rigor, challenging content and well-developed learning strategies that prepare ELLs to think critically, solve problems, and communicate in English are developed. Vocabulary development is an integral part of each and every lesson. We rely upon technology to provide ELLs with extra visual aids and auditory support to enhance learning and connect content to familiar situations and background knowledge so that ELLs can access new material. All best practices such as: language and content objectives, sentence frames, Thinking Maps, small group instruction, turn-and-talk and accountable talk stems are part of each lesson. Buddy systems enable the ELL students to feel more comfortable when speaking and trying new vocabulary. Classroom and ENL teachers plan together to determine supports needed by ELL students. Teachers plan together during common planning periods where teachers review assessments to inform instruction. The ENL teacher then selects the necessary vocabulary, comprehension skills and activities that will support the ELL in all content areas. These supports help ELLs meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated, we administer the Spanish-LAB to all applicable students. Spanish is the predominant native language for our ELL students. A strong foundation in the native language is a primary indicator of achievement in a second language, Newcomers will be appropriately evaluated in Spanish using the F & P Sistema de Evaluación de la Lectura to determine language skills that are underdeveloped in their native language, as well as skills that can be transferred to English. Additionally the New Language Arts Progression are used to create assessments, lessons, and tasks across content areas. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies that teachers of ELL- SWD students use to provide access to academic content areas are: The use of Thinking Maps to organize their thinking through writing and accelerate English language development by using informational texts and vocabulary development in all content areas—word roots, prefixes and suffixes, word parts, antonyms, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  synonyms, independent and guided reading and writing, compare and contrast stories,use of prior knowledge, learning the features of print (i.e.: chapters, headings, bold print, Table of Contents, index, glossary), main idea, predicting outcomes. Writing materials used include Fundations (K-2) and Ready Writing (3-5) ,TCRWP, and other supplies. Students who are both ELL and SWD receive services based on the NYSESLAT score and the IEP as far as meeting the needs and learning style of the child. If a SWD student is also an ELL, the service model is such that the child receives a push-in/pull-out plan where the ESL teacher meets the required mandated the number of minutes, and at the same time the teacher of the SWD student supports the learning since the two have planned together. All of the services mandated on the IEP are followed: for example if the child needs OT, the ENL teacher meets with the OT teacher to plan for the steps necessary to ensure comprehension. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P. S. 111 uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment during the instructional school day by providing the mandated minutes. Scheduling flexibility allows ENL teachers to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs, also flexibility in student grouping is also done to give students a chance to work with students at different levels. Teachers meet in teams once a week to discuss the strengths of the students and their progress. The students’ schedules are also flexible so that if a student will have his needs better met in a different class, for part of the time, his/her schedule is arranged so that it can happen. Whenever possible, the ELL-SWD students are placed in a general education class, especially during lunch, gym or other times of the day. Mainstreaming is always looked at as a beneficial and tailored to the child's academic strengths. The ENL teacher collaborates with all teachers of ELL-SWDs to ensure growth in second language development. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention programs for ELLs in ELA: K-2 students use Fundations, K-5 students use MyOn online reading program, the buddy system, iReady literacy program and Ready instruction that is provided in the classroom by the classroom teacher. Vocabulary-based, needs-based and learning styles-based (especially SWD) strategies are used to make the curriculum acessible to the students. Rotation of groups allows for each child’s needs to be met. All intervention services are offered in English. Intervention programs for ELLs in Math: iReady math instructional program and the buddy system. Vocabulary-based, needs-based and learning styles-based (especially SWD) strategies are used to make the curriculum accessible to the students. Rotation of groups allows for each child’s needs to be met. All intervention services are offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have iPads for our students, and we will continue to use Imagine Learning which helps the students with their native language as well as the English language. We will use Google Chrome books as needed. We will use the Targets of Measure more frequently when planning lessons and we will use the NLAP to map out how we will cover the Common Core State Standards during our pull-out and push-in periods. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal opportunities and access to all school programs. Technology labs, movement class, and music programs are open to everyone. ELLs have access to all after school programs in addition to their own Title III after school program.Title III money will be used to purchase supplemental materials. The goal of the program is to enable ELL students to develop oral language, and reading and writing skills that will help them satisfy New Language Arts Progressions, as well as 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  Common Core Learning Standards. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology in Math and ELA support the ELLs. The instructional materials used to support ELLs are Promethean boards, Fundations, manipulatives, iPads, Laptops, glossaries, dictionaries, Imagine Learning, iReady, and Thinking Maps. Promethean Boards are used throughout the lessons. Fundations is used as a phonics program, manipulatives are used in math to give ELLs an opportunity to learn through the use of objects and visuals. iPads are used for Imagine Learning, glossaries and dictionaries are used as tools to assist students in learning new words in different content areas and learn through the use of visuals. Thinking Maps are used to allow students to organize their thinking through writing. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students have access to bilingual picture dictionaries, books, and technology in their native language. The program model used is push-in/pull-out ESL. In that program, if the child is able to read in the native language, materials are provided and a teacher who speaks that language supports him/her. We use the Spanish LAB which provides information on a students’s level of literacy in their home language and this intern informs the types of resources to provide to the students. We also use the ENIL (the Spanish Fountas and Pinnell kit) to assess the students’ literacy skills in their native language. Additionally, we utilize teachers who speak the language of the students to clarify tasks or assignments for the students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures all required services and resources support and correspond to ELLs of all ages and grade levels. We also use their IEP (if the student has one) to ensure that they are receiving materials on their individual level based on assessments and as indicated on the IEP. The ENL teachers not only cover academic topics but they address topics that socioemotional wellness. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share space with a Charter school. A resource that we share is the library, the library is accessible to all ELL students in both schools. We also share the cafeteria and the students from both schools interact their to build a sense of community. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELLs we conduct an orientation to acclimate the parents to the new school environment, and we explain the expectations for the school year. Newly enrolled students are given packets that describe activities in the school, programs and special features. Students are introduced to teacher and classmates. Basic English vocabulary is introduced. Buddy systems in the classroom are set up to support the student. Peer tutoring from other grades is sometimes available with other students from the same country. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable to P.S. 111 ELL students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65 We do not have any Dual Language programs. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ELL personnel are provided opportunities for PD both through the Department of Education OELL programs and the District. They are also able to attend workshops in other schools and universities. All PD is turn-keyed to the staff. ENL teachers will continue to attend workshops for ELL teachers organized by the Bureau for Education Research. ENL teachers also receive on-going training from the District as well as other agencies. The content area teachers and classroom teachers receive turnkey PD. They are allowed to go to PD at outside places as well. Paraprofessionals receive PD with the teacher, and attend their own sessions in and out of the building.Professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. This is implemented during the contractually mandated PD time after school on a weekly basis. Book studies, and technology workshops, are included in these offerings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As the ELLs transition to middle schools, parents are notified about the programs in schools that meet the students’ needs or interest. Personnel from the schools are invited to either come to P.S. 111X to speak with our students or allow our students to visit their schools. The guidance counselor sets up meetings with parents of ELL students to assist with the transition to middle schools. Middle school personnel visit our students to help them transition and set up meetings in their school. Joint discussions between counselor and ENL teachers will occur regarding helping students with their time management and study skills. Discussions regarding setting long and short-term academic goals will be held.As per the new requirements of CR Part 154.2, 15% of total PD hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for ENL teachers will be on ELL-specific topics. All teachers will receive training from our ENL teachers, as well as outside agencies invited to provide PD during the contractually mandated time after school weekly. ENL teachers will utilize webinars, as well as attend PD organized by outside agencies on ELL topics. The ENL teachers will give copies of the PD attendance sheets to the Principal and the agenda as well. These documents are stored in the Principal's office in a binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teachers send letters home to schedule annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. We will utilize the contractually mandated Parent Engagement time each week for these meetings. The Language & Interpretation Unit and translation apps on the iPad are utilized for language assistance for the annual individual meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are an active part of our school. Workshops are ongoing for all parents Pre K -5. Parent surveys indicate the type of workshops that parents are interested in. All notices are sent home in various languages and translation is available during 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  meetings. Meetings take place at various times to allow for maximum attendance. We also conduct parent workshops specifically for parents of ELLs that focus on activities that they can do at home to support their child. At all meetings translation is available. The ENL department also coordinates events specifically for ELL Parents to attend with their child such as Family Cultural Celebration, trips to go sightseeing, various museums, Holiday Shows and Heritage Celebrations. We also organize a group of parents to attend the annual NYC ELL Parent Conference. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. ENL teachers assist ELL families with a variety of requests for things including translation assistance for personal affairs. ELL parents approach the ENL teachers with their concerns because they feel comfortable and express much gratitude for our willingness to help them. We strive to "wrap a warm blanket" around families new to the U.S. by providing them with one-to-one assistance navigating the public school system and helping their children succeed. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Celina Gutierrez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Seton Falls Elementary School School DBN: 11X111 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Celina Gutierrez Title Principal Eduardo Calderon Assistant Principal Anita Burrell Parent Coordinator Marguerite Douglas ENL/Bilingual Teacher Elisa Moore Gina Jones NA Laura Silberman NA Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Robin Cuthbertson School Counselor Meisha Ross Porter Vanessa MacDonna Almonte NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other NA Other Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 NA 06/23/17 NA 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 NA NA NA 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X111 School Name: Seton Falls Elementary School Superintendent: Jeremy K The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) n/a n/a n/a Marguerite* Campbell ENL Teacher yes 11/2/18 Anita n/a Burrell n/a Parent Coordinator yes 10/24/16 n/a n/a n/a yes yes n/a * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess the school’s written translation and oral interpretation ensures that all parents are provided with appropriate information in the language they prefer. They include the following: 1. Parents who are enrolling a new student are given the Home Language Identification Survey. This information is then entered on the ATS reports system. Based on the information provided on the HLIS a parent orientation is conducted with the parent and the child by a licensed pedagogue. The pedagogue explains the options the parent has when choosing a bilingual program for their child. The completed HLIS form is placed in the student's cumulative file and remains as a part of the student's permanent record. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70 The school determines within 30 days of a student’s enrollment the primary language spoken by the parent and whether language assistance will be needed for the parent to communicate effectively with the school and DOE. The numbers and names of parents who require interpretations and translation services are reflected by the data of the HLIS surveys and on the RAPL report on ATS. 2. The information provided on ATS and the emergency blue cards allows the school to maintain records of the parents’ primary language. 3. Timely provision of interpretation services at group and one-on-one meetings are available upon request when such services are necessary for parents to communicate with teachers, guidance counselors, school nurse and/or other school staff regarding critical information about their child’s education. 4. School Messenger is used to place calls in the event pertinent information needs to be provided to parents in the preferred language stated on the HLIS. Some of the calls could be notifying parents of IEP meetings, parent teachers conferences, and school workshops. 5. The growing population of ELLs from various parts of the world, is a clear indicator of the need for translation and interpretation services in Spanish, French, and Arabic. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Arabic French Fulani Mossi (aka More) Urdu Spanish Soninke Yoruba Bengali 727 5 6 1 1 1 63 1 1 3 90.2 0.62 0.74 0.12 0.12 0.12 7.82 0.12 0.12 1.58 729 3 6 1 0 1 64 1 1 3 90.45 0.37 0.74 0.12 0 0.12 7.94 0.12 0.12 1.58 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  n/a 11/8/18 Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Sept. 7, 2018 and throughout the year as needed All documents provided by the Department of Education of New York City containing critical information regarding their child’s education, including, but not limited to: Welcome back letters from principal, teachers, and parent coordinator. The DOE Discipline Code Arrival & dismissal procedures Parent handbook NY State testing dates Common core information Special education and related services documents All Spanish documents are translated into Spanish by the principal. High incidence languages translated by the Department of Education’s Language and Translation Unit Other staff members support with translating documents into other languages Parent handbook is offered in both English and Spanish 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  All school documents related to: School meetings School events School announcements Monthly calendars Notices of parent workshops Notification of extracurricular programs, and permission slips All documents related to Special Education Services including IEPs. Beginning in September of 2018 and throughout the year. School documents are translated into other languages by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. School documents are translated in to Spanish by the principal or school personnel. IEPs and related documents are translated and explained orally by Spanish speaking members of the SBST, and the T&I Unit. If other languages are required, an outside vendor is employed. n/a n/a n/a 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Paraprofessionals and teachers provide these services. September and November of 2018. March and May of 2019. Parent-Teacher conferences including curriculum night are held four times per year during the following months: September, November, March and May. During these conferences, in house personnel such as paraprofessionals are assigned to different floors. Monolingual teachers are encouraged to contact the Translation and Interpretation. Translation and Interpretation Unit is contacted via telephone for conferences Members of the SBST team, teachers, paraprofessionals, T and I Unit, and outside vendors Translation will be provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit Annuals and Mandated 3 year reviews Beginning in September of 2018 and continuing throughout the year Citywide ELL Parent Meeting Throughout the school year n/a n/a n/a 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The School Messenger system is used to communicate with parents in the event of a school emergency. We record messages in the Languages listed on ATS and on the HLIS. In the event of a low incidence language, we use a web-based translator. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 is reviewed with the staff at the opening Staff Conference on the first day teachers return by the principal. A copy of the regulation is included in the staff handbook. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 by: 1. Providing each parent whose primary language is one of the nine covered languages in the Translation and Interpretation Unit and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. We will obtain translated versions of this document, in the covered languages, through https://www.schools.nyc.gov/school-life/policies-for-all/parents-bill-of-rights b. The School posts in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance a sign in each of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. A list of staff members who are able to assist with interpretation and translation. Will will obtain the Language Access Kit from the Bronx Field Support Center. We will obtain additional literature on translation and interpretation through https://www.schools.nyc.gov/school-life/policies-for-all/language-access-policy Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? As part of our on-going efforts to ensure that all parents are well informed, Language Translation and Interpretation Parent Surveys will be conducted throughout the year to evaluate our communication efforts and provide feedback for quality and availability of services. Surveys will be conducted in November, March, and May of each school year. Surveys will be conducted in families’ home language. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74 
