2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 08X119 P.S. 119 Principal: MICHELE MONTANA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Dr. Emmett W. Bassett School 08X119 School Number (DBN): 320800010119 PreK-5 1075 Pugsley Avenue, Bronx, NY 10472 718) 822-5198 Phone Number: (718) 239-3112 Fax: Michele Montana Mmontan2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Michele Montana Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Elizabeth McGovern LakishaJoyner Gina Marcasciano n/a n/a n/a NA District Information Geographical District: 08 Dr. Erika Tobia Superintendent: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 Superintendent’s Office Address: ETobia@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 828-7789 Phone Number: (718) 822-6239 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 ZeregaAvenue jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: (718) 828-7776 (718) 828-6280Fax Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Michele Montana Elizabeth McGovern LakishaJoyner N/A N/A NA NA NA Gina Marcasciano Kelly Piscitello AmaliaBerdecia Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) n/a ElainaHussein Antoinette Hickson LisettePucha DaylynBhausar NA NA Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P. S. 119 MISSION STATEMENT Section 4: CEP Overview To provide a strong career and college-ready foundation from which each student will develop a personal commitment to learning, a respect for independent thinking, and an expanding curiosity about the world and its people. 2018-19 CEP 9  At PS 119, we believe education is a joint venture among students, parents and teachers. To be effective, teachers and parents must themselves continue to learn. Towards that end, all members of our community of learners work together to ensure all students read well, write clearly and coherently, study effectively, reason soundly and question thoughtfully. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 119 is a strong neighborhood school, treasured by its community, and led by an experienced, collaborative faculty. A large school in a multi-site campus, we unite to provide the best for our children. A tradition of excellence supports new approaches responsive to the needs of an ever-changing, diverse community. In the words of our mission statement, we believe all children are special. Growing up at P.S. 119 is marked by an array of joyful milestones. Children shine for their families at monthly assemblies. Student exhibits showcase creative expression. Children look forward to engaging in enrichment programs in the arts and social studies in all grades, participating in field trips that promote intellectual stimulation, and studying ballroom dancing in the upper grades. Parents visit classrooms on Back-to-School-Days, at publishing parties, and multicultural festivities and observe their child’s growth over the years. Our Positive Behavior Intervention and Support (P.B.I.S.) program teaches children to meet school expectations for appropriate behavior. Our slogan, “ P.S. 119 ROCKS" teaches children to be Respectful, Organized, Caring, Knowledgeable, and Safe. A continuing partnership with New York University’s Parent Corps provides training to teachers and parents in developmentally appropriate child rearing practices. Morning announcements and monthly character education assemblies support students in developing a positive approach to school and life. We believe that a happy, secure child learns best. School resources are used to keep the school environment orderly and invigorating. Rewards are showered upon children excelling in school-wide reading incentive programs. Our literacy curriculum celebrates critical thinking and comprehension through independent reading. Kitchen tables throughout the neighborhood become workstations for the creation of science projects, transforming our gymnasium into the highly anticipated Annual Science Fair. This school wide curriculum celebration has evolved to include our visual arts expo with social studies themes evidenced throughout. Family Fun and Learning Nights, Adult ESL classes, professional and student performances and a variety of enrichment clubs add excitement to our learning environment. We have secured and will continue to secure resources to support technology and arts programming through Donors Choose, the office of Council Member Ruben Diaz, Sr., NYS Senator Luis Sepulveda, and the office of Bronx Borough President, Ruben Diaz, Jr. . All classrooms have interactive whiteboards and document cameras to support visual learning, internet accessibility, and instruction that promotes access for all. All classrooms have computers, cameras and printers with a wide array of software and internet access and a 3D printer offers new avenues for invention in our technology lab. The P.S. 119 professional development system provides mentoring, renewal and time for collegial sharing. Consultants from National Training Network, LitLife, Curriculum Associates, I0, the New Teacher Center Mentor, Assistant Principals, and the Universal Literacy Coach coordinate job-embedded professional planning and demonstrations. Administrators participate in Teachers College Leadership Institutes, District 8 Monthly retreats for Administrators, and Field Center Professional learning opportunities. Professional study groups meet to explore and apply educational theory and practice. Ever-evolving curriculum maps guide coherent, standards-based instruction. Teachers get to know their students well, and their observations are highly valued as we design meaningful learning 2018-19 CEP 10  for each child. Professional learning is designed to support children in making at least one year’s progress in each subject. The School Leadership Team monitors student progress to identify approaches and programs that address gaps in instruction. We find the workshop model of teaching and learning -- through teacher demonstrations and small-group, universal-design based practice -- effective, both socially and educationally. Instruction grounded in strong, rigorous core curricula(Teachers' College Reading and Writing Units of Study, TC Phonics, Envisions Math (K-2) Keys Elements in Mathematics, Passport to Social Studies, and Amplify Science (K-5) provides examples of how the community unites to improve student achievement through rigorous curricula and instruction. Each grade level takes at least five major trips to the city’s historical and cultural institutions, including but not limited to The New York Botanical Garden, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, the New York Historical Society, Museum Of Modern Art, Wave Hill, The Bronx Zoo, The Museum of the City of New York, to name a few, to elevate students’ vocabulary and cultural sophistication. Our experienced teachers, committed parents, and systems of communication and cooperation, support the changes we seek. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At P.S. 119 there are approximately 814 students in Pre-Kindergarten through 5th grade. Students with special education needs comprise 15% of the total population while our ENL students comprise 28% of our population. There are 69 students living in doubled-up accommodations or in temporary housing. The growth of our special needs and English Language Learner population challenges us to find better ways to address each child’s needs. In 2018, only 7% of our English Language Learner population, and only 15% of or Students With Disabilities scored a 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA exam. This is pushing our community to redouble our efforts to meet the needs of all of our students. Our students with special needs population need access to grade level curricula to allow for multiple entry points to learning, differentiated learning as well as language and vocabulary development, and the development of math skills and strategies to support grade level work through small group instruction and computer adaptive instruction. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. At P.S. 119, we maintain a unity of purpose and a sense of urgency as we work to not only meet the needs of all children but to accelerate learning for all learners, and to involve our entire community in an open dialogue about the development of our school. Overall proficiency levels in ELA and Math were 34.5% and 34.4% respectively. Our goal is to accelerate student learning and increase proficiency levels school wide. Area of Focus: If we recommit to carrying out our school's mission, by targeting all students' individual learning needs, engaging in regular cycles of inquiry, empowering parents and advancing equity and access for all, then we will improve outcomes for our students. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X119 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 888 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 31 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 81.8% % Reduced Lunch 28.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.8% 48.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 35.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 80% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A YSH YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 75 75 92.6% 0.3% 15.4% 9.3% 29.4% 4.4% 6 10% 8.5 35.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO NO YES YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Wide NYS ELA Data 2018 Spring 2018 NYS ELA Data as Reported on the ATS RISA report GRADE # LVL 1 % LVL 1 # LVL 2 % LVL 2 # LVL 3 % LVL 3 # LVL 4 % LVL 4 TOTAL STS TESTED 03 04 05 28 31 77 21.3% 25.8% 44.7% 48 45 48 36.6% 37.5% 27.9% 48 26 25 TOTALS 136 32.1% 141 33.3% 99 7 18 22 36.6% 21.6% 14.5% 23.4% 47 5.3% 15% 12.8% 11.1% 131 120 172 423 School Wide NYS Math Data 2018 School Wide NYS Math Data 2018 as reported in ATS RISA GRADE # LVL 1 % LVL 1 # LVL 2 % LVL 2 # LVL 3 % LVL 3 # LVL 4 % LVL 4 TOTAL STS TESTED 03 04 05 32 51 84 TOTALS 167 23.8% 39.8% 47.5% 38% 31.3% 42 27.3% 35 24.8% 44 121 27.6% 43 18 27 88 32% 14% 15.3% 20% 17 24 22 63 12.7% 18.7% 12.4% 14.4% 134 128 177 439 2018-19 CEP 13  School Quality Review Report (2017-2018) 1.1 Rigorous Curriculum Findings School leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and the instructional shifts. Curricula and academic tasks consistently emphasize rigorous habits and higher-order skills. Impact Lesson plans and units promote college and career readiness through writing across grades and subjects. Lesson plans reflect rigorous tasks for all students, including English Language Learners (ELLs). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. BY JUNE 2019, WE WILL DECREASE THE NUMBER OF STUDENTS ACHIEVING LEVEL 1 BY 10% IN ELA BY FOCUSING ON GUIDED READING STRATEGIES IN GRADES K-5 AND IN MATH BY DECREASING THE NUMBER OF STUDENTS ACHIEVING A LEVEL 1 BY 10% AS WELL AS INCREASE THE NUMBER OF STUDENTS SCORING LEVEL 3 OR LEVEL 4 BY 10% AS MEASURED BY I-READY IN BOTH SUBJECT AREAS and ENGAGING IN PROBLEM SOLVING AND THE FIVE MATHEMATICAL PRACTICES DAILY. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? BY THE END OF OCTOBER, 2018, all classroom teachers will analyze NYS Assessment Data 2017-18 and baseline assessment results (i-ready, TC Reading and Writing, KEMS, F&P) to determine areas of focus for the coming school year. In September, 2018 Grade Leaders will work with Administration to revise the schedule and pacing for the Units of Study to promote both vertical and horizontal alignment and meet the needs of students as evidenced by the above data analysis. The team will revisit the calendar monthly and make adjustments as necessary based on student performance. June, 2018 - September, 2018 September, 2018 - June, 2019 Administration Instructional Coach Administration Grade teams Grade Leaders Classroom teachers, Administration Administration and grade Leaders and grade teams, Literacy consultant coach Incorporate 120-minute ELA Block (30 = PH/WW, 45 = Reading & 45 = Writing) & 90-minute MATH Block inclusive of dedicated 30-minutes for PROBLEM SOLVING By NOVEMBER, 2018 students will have access to i-ready lessons in the tech labs before and after school day begins via Morning and After-School Tech Programs. In order to meet the needs of our ENL population, ENL and content area teachers will strengthen collaborative classroom teaching where in ENL classrooms, an ENL licensed teacher will co-teach with the common branch classroom teacher during the school day. P.S. 119 will contract with Curriculum Associates, publishers of i-ready to provide professional development in advancing the use of i-ready, analyzing data on student performance and the i-ready tool box in the classroom and in effectively using the i-ready reports to plan differentiated instruction in reading, Administration Classroom Teachers Classroom Teachers ENL Teachers ENL Administrator Universal Literacy Coach I-Ready Consultant, Literacy Consultants, Universal Literacy October, 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Classroom teachers September 2018- June 2019 Administration, ENL and content area teachers 4-6 days between September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Technology Teacher, ENL coordinators, grade team leaders 2018-19 CEP 15  providing access to i-ready additional resources from K to 2 in addition to grades 3-5 Coach, Classroom Teachers Administration Administration Universal Literacy Coach Mondays September 2018 June 2019 Administration, National Training Network and Literacy Consultants, Universal Literacy Coach, grade leaders, department specialists Administration September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Teachers, SLT Administration September 2018 Administration Teachers January 2019 March 2019 June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Administration Administration September 2018-June 2019 Beginning in September 2018 and continuing through the year, Teacher Teams by grade, by special education focus, and by ENL focus will meet during the Monday professional development time with the National Training Network Consultant, LITLIFE consultant, administration and teacher teams to analyze student work and plan differentiated instruction based on the data analysis. Teacher Teams will advance their knowledge of KEMS, Go Math, and enVision Math curricula by using protocols to identify big ideas of units, the necessary pre-requisite knowledge, skills and strategies to reach these big ideas, and differentiate lessons so to meet the needs of all learners, including ENL and SWD. Study groups and book clubs will be offered on a per session basis, as well. Interim student growth throughout the school year will be measured and monitored using i-Ready Math and ELA assessments given in September, January, and May . Each unit of math and ELA will begin with a pre-assesment to identify levels of readiness, gaps in knowledge and inform unit instruction. Each unit will end with a cumulative assessment. Teachers will monitor for growth, identify areas of weakness and work with the math consultant to construct gap lessons and identify needs for professional learning. All Teachers Administration Instructional Coach, Literacy Consultants, All Teachers Administration Teachers All students will take part in a problem of the day routine, focusing on the five mathematical practices. Problems will provided from Exemplars. Teachers will receive professional development in the protocol and the practices. Teachers will use this formative assessment to group students and design instruction. Ongoing Parent Workshops will be provided on i-ready at -home resources curriculum and grade expectations throughout the year with Spanish, Bengali, and Arabic translations available. Administration Teachers Teachers Parent Coordinator PA members 2018-19 CEP 16  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. On Super Tuesday afternoons, in addition to meeting and phoning families, teachers and staff will offer parent engagement activities such as book clubs, study skills workshops, technology support workshops using i-ready, etc. In addition, workshops will be offered to families on Friday mornings addressing needs of families as identified by school based survey; evening curricular events will be offered at least two times during the school year (Fall and Spring); Next Jump After school program and Beacon program will offer workshops and meetings for parents and families. Parent Corps will be offering weekly parent sessions facilitate by guidance staff. Students' user names and passwords for i-ready will be sent home with students to allow home access Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Twice monthly, teachers will meet in inquiry-focused grade team meetings to analyze student work, plan to remediate or accelerate student learning using protocols and monitor student progress with adjustments made as needed. Improve instruction for students with special needs by implementing universal design for learning principles in planning. New Teacher Center Mentor for new teachers and second year teachers (K-5) Mathematics consultant---National Training Network Math Exemplars I-ready site licenses for ELA and Math i-ready Consultant from Curriculum Associates (i-Ready) I0/Datacation Consultant for I0, Skedula, Pupil Path, etc. Planning meetings Envisions, Go Math, and KEMS Ongoing Professional Development Team meetings, teacher and school-community team meetings (including Inquiry teams, School Leadership Team, Child Study Team, SIT, English New Learners, etc,) Envision Math curricular materials and professional development for faculty (K-2) Amplify Science curricular materials and professional development for faculty (K-5) Supplementary instructional materials for Math and ELA: Keys to Elements in Mathematics and Benchmark Poetry Units (K-5), Wordly Wise, Exemplars I-Ready Math (K-5) and Ready Supplementary instructional materials 2018-19 CEP 17  IO (formerly Datacation) ---Skedula, Pupil Path Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feburary, 2019, there will be an decrease of students achieving Tier 3 of 5% as measured by i-ready assessments in Math when compared to February, 2018 data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) i-Ready Math benchmark assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: The school uses rigorous, standards based curriculum in every classroom: general education, special education, and integrated co-teaching model. The school has implemented a co-teaching framework for working with ENL students in a general education population. Needs: The school has a total of 120 students between grades K and 5 with an IEP, making up 14.7% of our students. 90 of these students are in grades 3, 4, and 5. In 2017, 0 students with an IEP scored a 3 or a 4 on the NYS ELA or Math Tests In 2018, 15 students with an IEP scored a 3 or a 4 on the NYS ELA or Math Tests. Data: NUMBER OF SWDS BY SERVICE AND GRADE RELATED SERVICES SETSS ICT SELF CONTAINED TOTALS 2 1 3 5 5 3 20 1 1 0 6 4 2 14 0 0 9 19 12 12 51 5 3 6 10 6 6 35 7 5 18 40 27 23 120 GRADE 0K 01 02 03 04 05 TOTALS Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 19  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. BY JUNE 2019, THERE WILL BE A 10% REDUCTION IN THE NUMBER OF OORS INCIDENTS AS A RESULT OF IMPLEMENTING RESPONSIVE CLASSROOMS MORNING MEETING PROTOCOLS AS MEASURED BY THE NUMBER OF INCIDENTS REPORTED IN OORS. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Identify and analyze data from the 2018 NYS ELA and Math Exams. SWD K-5 Sept.- Oct. 2018 Identify and analyze benchmark and classroom data of students with disabilities SWD K-5 every 8 weeks Sept.- June Assistant Principals, Principal's Cabinet, Grade Leaders, Grade Teams Classroom teachers, SIT Team, Plan and implement town hall meetings to share findings, identify barriers, and craft possible solutions Families K-5 twice during school year Equity Team, Assistant Principals, Principal n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Meetings (with interpreters) to preview upcoming units of study in ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science will be offered approximately every 6 weeks by teacher teams and Special Education providers; Librarian with Parent Coordinator and PK family assistant will host parent-child book clubs and book talks for staff and parents to promote family engagement in reading at least 4 times per year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SIT Team IEP Teacher Teacher team meetings for data analysis 2018-19 CEP 21  two evening town hall meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, we will have held one town hall meeting studying data inequity and shown by fliers, agenda and attendance sign in sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. fliers, agenda and attendance sign in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality Review 2017-18 Findings Teacher teams analyze student work and assessments for students that they share. Distributive leadership structures are developing to support leadership capacity-building and to include teachers in key decisions. Impact Because of infrequent meetings, the work of department and grade-level teams does not demonstrate student progress for specific groups of students. Although teachers and school leaders have demonstrated some leadership capacity, it rarely results in effective student learning School Wide NYS ELA Data 2018 GRADE # LVL 1 % LVL 1 # LVL 2 % LVL 2 # LVL 3 % LVL 3 # LVL 4 % LVL 4 TOTAL STS TESTED 03 04 05 28 31 77 21.3% 25.8% 44.7% 48 45 48 36.6% 37.5% 27.9% 48 26 25 TOTALS 136 32.2% 141 33.3% 99 7 18 22 36.6% 21.6% 14.5% 23.4% 47 131 5.3% 15% 120 12.8% 172 11.1% 423 When looking at whole school performance, our NYS ELA performance index increased by 3 points from 106 to 109. It is our goal and intent to continue and increase this upward trajectory. SCHOOL WIDE NYS MATH DATA 2018 GRADE # LVL 1 % LVL 1 # LVL 2 % LVL 2 # LVL 3 % LVL 3 # LVL 4 % LVL 4 TOTAL STS TESTED 03 04 05 32 51 84 TOTALS 167 23.8% 39.8% 47.5% 38% 31.3% 42 27.3% 35 44 24.8% 121 27.6% 43 18 27 88 32% 14% 15.3% 20% 17 24 22 63 12.7% 18.7% 12.4% 14.4% 134 128 177 439 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. BY JUNE 2019, THERE WILL BE A 10% DECREASE IN STUDENTS PERFORMING AT LEVEL 1 IN ELA AND MATH AS A RESULT OF TEACHER TEAMS PARTICIPATING IN INQUIRY TEAMS USING PROTOCOLS AS MEASURED BY MEETING AGENDAS, SIGN-IN SHEETS, AND MEETING MINUTES. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students in grades 1-5 will take part in the ELA and Math i-Ready benchmark assessments 3 times per year All students K-5 Teachers will use data analysis tools available on i-Ready Central to analyze student data All teachers K-5 Administrators will use data analysis tools available on i-Ready Central to hold data discussions with teachers about their students and the next steps for instruction. All teachers K-5 Professional Development will be data-centered, with teachers looking at data gathered from pre- and post unit assessments, running records, and in classroom assessments and building instructional plans to meet student needs. all teachers K-5 Administrators, Teachers Administrators, Classroom Teachers Administrators, Classroom Teachers Administrators, Classroom Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 After each assessment, BOY and MOY After each assessment, BOY and MOY every 6 weeks throughout SY 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Newsletter, quarterly meetings with administration Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. National Teaching Center mentor, Monday Professional Development time (or afterschool planning time), Common Core Standards/curriculum maps, inquiry-based standards, Continuum of Literacy, Teachers College Writing Pathways, Teachers College Reading Pathways grades 3-5. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 25  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, 90% of teachers will participate in inquiry-based teacher team meetings focused on Reading, Writing, and Math. Progress will be measured through attendance sign-in sheets and the collection of exit slips at team meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher team meeting agendas and sign in sheets, exit slips, collection of data analysis protocols Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-18 Quality Review, teacher teams (4.2) was an area of need. The QR stated because of infrequent meetings, the work of department and grade-level teams does not demonstrate student progress for specific groups of students. Although teachers and school leaders have demonstrated some leadership capacity, it rarely results in effective student learning. (1.4) The school is developing an approach to culture-building, discipline, and social-emotional support, although there is little evidence of student voice being valued. Structures are developing to ensure social-emotional learning, child/youth development, attendance and guidance supports for students. Impact We will introduce Responsive Classrooms practices, particularly, morning meeting, and continue to reinvigorate programs such as PBIS ( as P.S. 119 ROCKS (Respect, Organization, Caring, Knowledge, and Safety. are beginning to help build a culture in which student voice is welcome and valued. Guidance counselors are developing supports to know students well on an individual basis. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By JUNE, 2019, ON AVERAGE, THERE WILL BE A 10% INCREASE IN THE OVERALL MOTP SCORE FOR DANIELSON'S COMPONENTS 3C ENGAGING STUDENTS IN LEARNING, AND 3D-USING ASSESSMENT IN INSTRUCTION AS A RESULT OF TIMELY, ACTIONABLE FEEDBACK. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. By September 2018, the Administration Team will create and implement a calendar cycle of informal and formal observations, feedback and follow-up based upon the Danielson Framework for Teaching, observing each teacher a minimum of 3 times and completing a minimum of three observations per week. 2. Assistant Principals will conduct daily informal walk-throughs with feedback based on the Instructional Expectations as defined and presented to the staff in September of 2018. 3. The Administrators will provide timely, effective, and actionable feedback to teachers after each observation, clear next steps, and strategic coaching. 4. The Assistant Principals will report weekly to the Principal on the status, trends, and findings of observations. 5. The Teacher Leader will establish a lab site classroom to support professional learning among colleagues. 6. Teacher Teams will use protocols to identify big ideas of units, the necessary knowledge, skills and strategies to reach these big ideas, and differentiate lessons so to meet the needs of all learners, including ENL and SWD. 7. By September, 2018 NTN, Curriculum Associates and Lit Life will deliver and support PD focused on GUIDED READING,TC Reading and Writing Workshop; the mathematics standards and practices and the resources on Engage NY; the use of Skedula, i-Ready, and Raz Kids; the use of protocols to look at student work; the use of protocols to continue to advance understanding and implentation of the TC Units of Study and CCLS. 8. Participation in Yale University Ruler Training on Social and Emotional Development 9. Use of the Lead Teacher role in providing professional development, teacher study group and lab sites NA Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coach, NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 28  NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At least once every six weeks, family events to promote dialogue and discussion and inquiry will be offered by cluster teachers and specialists on Tuesdays during parent engagement. Family round-tables to promote discussion at home will be developed and offered at least 2x during the school year and facilitated by the Parent Coordinator, identified teachers and Beacon Program staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal and Assistant Principals will attend Teachers College Leadership PLC meetings for District 8 Administrators, Principals ' and Assistant Principals' PLC, and delineating roles and responsibilities among the administrators will maximize time spent in observing and providing timely actionable feedback to teachers. Frequent calibration of observations among administrators supported by visits and walk-through Teacher Development District Coach. Hiring 2 F-status supervisor to assist in supporting re-organization and improved scheduling. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 55% of teachers will have been rated effective /highly effective in Advance, specifically in components: 3C (student engagement) and 3D (assessment and feedback) as measured by observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance teacher evaluation system, Classroom visitation, Instructional Rounds Learning Walks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the NYC School Survey, 94% of parents feel respected by their child's principal. 91% of parents believe that the school works hard to build trusting relationships with parents. Parents are expressing an increased interest in being part of the academics and the classroom. Only 64% of parents reported having the opportunity to help in the classroom, however 86% of parents reported the opportunity to observe classroom instruction. The PA has also expressed an interest in having a more active role in the academic life of their students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. BY JUNE 2019, THROUGH A PARTNERSHIP WITH CBO'S THERE WILL BE A 10% INCREASE IN PARENT PARTICIPATION AT PARENT WORKSHOPS AND FAMILY ACTIVITIES AS A RESULT OF SURVEYS/QUESTIONNAIRES, AND FEEDBACK FORMS AS MEASURED BY ATTENDANCE/SIGN-IN SHEETS, AGENDAS, AND MINUTES OF SUCH MEETINGS/EVENTS. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Engagement Tuesday Parent Workshops and Meetings September-June Parent Engagement Tuesday September-June Weekly for 14 weeks December-June Three trips in the Spring 2018, Dates TBD Implement a parent workshop to reach the parents that are unable to attend Parents Corps/NYU Langone Pre-K and K Parenting Course. Parents will be encouraged to share with each other strategies that have worked in the past in a relaxed and informal setting. Tips and strategies will be offered on topics such as bullying identification and prevention, child abuse prevention, and school expectations. Parents of students that have low attendance will be encouraged to attend. Parents for Grades K-5 Strategically plan weekly topics for SUPER TUESDAY PARENT WORKSHOPS that are useful, timely and relevant. Pre K-5 Continue partnership with Parent Corps/NYU Langone Medical Center for implementation of parenting workshops, Friends schools and creative arts workshops. Pre-K & K Parent Coordinator and PA will work together to schedule a series of parent trips to museums and gardens around the city in order to broaden the experiences and knowledge base of parents and teach families of the resources the city has to offer. parents grades k-5 In order to improve communication with parents regarding expectations, student progress, and data, every student will have an account in IO Education, also known as Skedula, giving families unlimited access to the Pupil Path Service where they can see student data and communicate with the teacher. Review & revise all modes and means of school-to-home communication to ensure efficiency, coherence and consistency 2018-19 CEP 31  Look to expand seasonal school-wide family events to monthly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Beacon Program at PS 119 will enter its second year and continue to work with the school leadership to engage the families and community. Additionally, Next Jump will continue to support PS 119 Before/After School and Saturday activities and families. Partnerships with SmartWorks, the New York Botanical Gardens, NYS Parks, New York Historical Society, LitLife, National Training Network, Team First, Next Jump, Dancing Classrooms, Parent Corps, VNS Promise Zone and Viva Flamenco. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Pre K Family Worker, teachers, administrators, Parent Corps Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, teachers and school leadership will have met in September and December, 2018 at SLT meetings to discuss increase of parental participation in school-wide activities and awareness of use of systems for communication such as NY ID, Skedula, PS 119 website and i-Ready platforms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey, Discussion, sign in sheets, workshop reflection forms Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1,2 NYS ELA Exam. Screening for WRP, GR, Level 1, NYS math exam. Small group math Classroom assessments, baseline assessments. Classroom assessments, baseline writing and pre-assessments Behavior patterns, CST referral Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided reading, clore reading, Wilson reading Problem solving, math facts Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one to one School day, after school, before school Small group, one to one School day, after school, before school Science projects, technology support,scaffolding of content,re-teaching, differentiation, reciprocalteaching Passport to Social Studies, scaffolding of content, re-teaching, differentiation, reciprocal teaching ERSS Counseling, short term guidance, Promise zone School day, after school Small group, technology support,Tier 1 Classroom Intervention Small group, technology support, Tier 1 Classroom Intervention School day, after school Small group, one to one School day, after school, before school 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Promise Zone Family Outreach Counseling Provision of school supplies, clothing, class dues for graduating classes Sponsorship for field trips School sponsored admission fees Summer Backpacks Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). There are presently 88 students in temporary housing. NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teaching licenses are verified prior to hiring, placements are made with consideration of licensing. Mentoring matches support new teachers. Collaboration and trust are engendered to support a retention rate of 94%; provide high-level job-embedded professional development for all teachers with staff development provided by National Training Network, Generation Ready, IO ; Curriculum Associates (I-Ready ELA and Math). Selected Staff and administrators are also involved in Parent Corps Professional Development (PK), DOE training in PK curriculum and Thrive Track; Teachers College Reading and Writing Leadership PLC; District 8 PLCs and professional development on strengthening instruction in writing, reading, math, social studies and science. The school is participating in the i3 National Teacher Center Mentoring and School Leadership Program to support new teacher development and retention; the school organization has been restructured to include an integrated co-teaching model for ENL classes. This is intended to maximize the specialized training of ENL teachers in collaborative practice with general education teaching partners. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The Professional Development Committee will schedule ongoing professional development sessions based on data generated from student work. Protocols for identifying patterns and trends student work will be used to inform instructional planning. Highly effective teachers and teachers exploring new approaches will be encouraged to share their practices in interactive workshops. A consultant will be contracted from Pearson (Envision Math, LitLife and National Training Network to support teachers based on their individual professional needs and at the same time support Monday Professional development for larger groups of teachers in unpacking the Teachers College Reading and Writing Curriculum and TC Phonics and Using Keys to Mathematical Excellence, Amplify Science and Envision Math (K-2). Based on outcomes from the Quality Review and Principal observations, the following professional development will be added: Planning for high impact engagement; questioning and discussion in all core subject classrooms; using formative assessments and effective use of current data to provide relevant instructional support for struggling students. 2018-19 CEP 36  Professional Learning Communities will be established and will meet at intervals scheduled throughout the school year.. Administrators will adjust differentiated professional development based on analysis of teacher observations and feedback through ADVANCE. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Incorporate the Inspire track for PK. Develop and publish family newsletter and provide PK page on the school website. Provide workshops for parents on a range of subjects from nutrition, academic preparedness, cultural opportunities and school assemblies. Continue relationship with Parent Corps (NYU Langone) Program for Pre-kindergarten children and their families which supports teachers, children, paraprofessionals and their families in social-emotional development. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Through discussions with grade team leaders, SLT members, and the instructional cabinet which includes ENL decisions are made with regard to appropriate multiple assessments. For example, the decision to use the ELL interim assessment for targeted ENL students (transitioning and commanding level) was based on the shared analysis of student with the ENL vertical team. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x x x x Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A. 5B. 5C. 5D, 5E, 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 4,753,786 x Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 688,039 132,689 32,462 132,689 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 2018-19 CEP 38  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Dr. Emmett W. Bassett School, P.S. 119, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Dr. Emmett W. Bassett School, P.S. 119 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 41  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Meeting; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Dr. Emmett W. Bassett School, P.S. 119, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 42  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 44  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 119 is implementing a supplemental program to provide additional support for the ENL students from Grade 3 to Grade 5. To reach our goal of 18% of ENL students attaining Commanding on the NYSESLAT (totaling 46 students) we have designed a program that will ensure the ENLs have the academic skills and support they need to progress. The selected subgroup consists of those students, in grade 3-5, who score on the Transitioning and Expanding levels; we anticipate approximately 85 students will be invited to join the after-school program. We feel these are appropriate levels to target because they are likely to progress with this additional intervention. The duration of the programs will be for 16 weeks, from November 3, 2018 -March 30th, 2019. The after-school sessions will meet two days a week, on Wednesday and Thursdays, from 2:35 to 3:35 pm. We anticipate having 3 ENL teachers provide instruction in English. The Saturday Program will include and arts component and will run for the same period; classes will meet from 9:30-11:30 a.m. The types of materials (will/may) include the series Building Fluency through Reader's Theater from Teacher Created Materials and a variety of arts supplies, as well as materials from LEGO education. The Reader's Theater program builds English language proficiency through the four modalities, listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The program offers differentiated, level appropriate texts, with common themes. Each texts is available in book and audio formats with included CD rom. In addition, there is a parent component to support literacy learning and language development at home. Focused Mathematics is a versatile program that incorporates research-based intervention strategies while emphasizing critical areas of mathematical focus, at each grade level. Through explicit instruction of mathematical strategies, students will learn how to be active math learners. The program includes a color student book, math fluency games, and assessments for each of the skills covered. This year we will continue to include our newly arrived ELL students in after-school academic language program. We have designed a program specifically for ELLs, called, ""Express Yourself." This program will meet once weekly beginning in October. Led by the guidance counselors, the goal of the club is to familiarize students with school events, opportunities and guidelines. This information is provided during the school day, but this gathering provides amplification of the message. Additionally, the program will offer a safe place for students to acclimate to the school culture and feel welcome, as well as a chance to "Express" themselves orally and artistically. Clubs will be funded by Title III funding allocation. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our ELL Services Coordinator, Caterina DiTillio, is working with our Administration, instructional coaches, one of whom is TESOL licensed, to conduct ongoing professional development workshops for our Integrated ENL Program. Our program will better serve our approximately 300 current ELL students and--- recently Commanding students by partnering each licensed ENL teacher with two Common Branch licensed teachers, one at the upper level and another at the lower grade level. The ENL teachers will collaborate, co-plan, and co-teach with each Common Branch teacher, during their literacy blocks. We plan to have ongoing workshops that will engage teachers of ELLs and teachers of SWD's, on the most effective models of collaborative teaching. In addition, ENL and Common Branch teachers will also receive professional development on instructional strategies to support ENL students. Per session will be offered to our collaborative teams to plan in late August. Teachers responsible for delivery of instruction will receive site-based staff development throughout the school year from the ELL Services Coordinator and the Instructional Coach. Some of these sessions will include: -Common Core State Standards, including the Language Standards - Targets of Measure (TOM's) - How to incorporate effective language objectives into each lesson -Differentiated Strategies for ELLs in content area instruction -Looking at ELL Data to create groups -NYSESLAT, implications for teaching and instruction These programs are at no cost to Title III. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: P.S. 119 makes it a priority to establish relationships with all parents, especially the parents of ELLS. We hope to continue fostering a warm and welcoming environment, where all parents 2018-19 CEP 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities feel comfortable and valued. Our goal is to strengthen the home school connection and build a bridge to minimize language and cultural divides. This initiative includes several different areas and these programs are at no cost to -Family Workshops - Lourdes Flores, the Parent Coordinator, conducts a variety of workshops for the parents. These workshops include topics such as: homework help, literacy and math curriculum, financial literacy, nutrition, employment assistance, interview skills, parenting/discipline. Ms. Flores also includes topics on the ELA and Math assessments. The ENL staff will include a session on the NYSESLAT, to inform parents about the skills being assessed and how the exam is designed. Parents who participate in these workshops will receive a resource packet with activities for use at home with their children, as well as various other incentives to increase parent participation. Workshops are held in English and Spanish, along with Arabic and Bengali translation services. Ms. Flores also offers English as a New Language instruction to parents. -Parent Corps Family Program will continue this year at P.S. 119. This program involves ELL and Non ELL parents in workshops designed to promote high quality learning environments for young children through family engagement. Parent Corps involved Kindergarten families in fourteen weekly groups , two hours per week. Groups are led in Spanish and English with interpretation available for Arabic and Bengali speaking participants. *Parent groups involve all caregivers in discussion and activity groups led by a mental health professional and an early childhood educator. *Friends School involved pre-kindergarten students in lessons designed to help children learn emotional and self-regulation skills. The Parent Corps Program comes to P.S. 119 via a partnership with the NYU Langone Medical School as a result of our work with the Positive Behavior Intervention and Support (PBIS) Initiative and Promise Zone, a project of the VIsiting Nurse Service. -Our Parent Coordinator successfully recruits a group of approximately 15 parents to attend the annual ELL Parent Conference at Columbia University. -We have partnered with the NYC Department of Adult and Continuing Education to provide free ESL classes for our ESL parents and other members the community, who greatly enjoy these sessions. Language can be a barrier that can stymie the connection between parent and teachers and the school. By providing these adult education courses, we hope to strengthen the connection our parents have with our school and also improve communication between parents and the school. Parent Orientation Meeting: At the beginning of the school year and again mid-year we hold these meetings during the first weeks of school to inform parents and bring awareness about program options, city and state assessments as well as the Common Core Standards. We inform our parents of any new policies and initiatives that will affect the education of their children. It is important for us to make sure our parents are well informed to start off our school year on the right track. Back to School Day/Meet and Greet: This event is designed for parents in late September to provide families with a chance to meet with their child’s teacher. During this event the teacher informs the parents of the classroom rules, expectations, curriculum, and other information. We use this event as an opportunity to build connections and strong communication between teachers and parents; this way parents and teachers can be on the same page to start the school year. Family Fun Nights/Movie Nights: Parents and children attend various workshops that span different disciplines. We provide math and science workshops, as well as arts and crafts, gym, and other fun academic games. Our intention is that both parents and children come out with a delightful and enlightening shared experience. Basic Computer Training: This program is used to provide materials and training for our parents to improve their basic computer skills. Computers are available daily in the Parent Room located 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities in room 204. The use of technology has become more widespread as an educational tool for our students; therefore, it is our belief that parents should be provided with computer training in order to further help their children with their education. We recently opened a new, state of the art computer lab, which will help us to serve more parents at the same time. Parent Volunteering: Parents volunteer throughout the school day. Whether it is assisting teachers, monitoring the halls or the cafeteria, our parents become directly involved with the day-to-day activities of school life. This allows parents to be more involved with their children’s education by experiencing it up-close. Parent volunteers are trained and certified through the Learning Leaders program. Spring Dance (formerly known as Father-Daughter Dance): We hold this event in June and it offers a special night between parents and their daughters. This event has gained popularity and it is a great way to accentuate the bond between father and daughter, creating lasting memories. This semi-formal event has been a success over the past four years. Communicating with families: • P.S.119.net - Our website serves to provide parents and the community with the following: calendar of events, important notices, school policies, quick Internet links to important resources and teacher pages. • Encourage communication between home and school using the P.S. 119 Student Agenda Planner which contains space for daily communication between parents and teachers. • Reach out to families using our automated phone call system to keep them informed of important announcements and events, like Super Tuesday's. Every Tuesday parents have open access to teachers after-school. Teachers plan engaging workshops and activities for parents and their children. Train staff in the use of Pupil Path communications, part of io/skedula program, to facilitate regular communication with families. • Translated flyers and personalized notes and phone calls are used to communicate with families regarding scheduled events. Bengali, Spanish, and Arabic parents are also available to translate and discuss these communications. These programs are at no cost to Title III. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. NA NA 2018-19 CEP 51 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 08 School Name The Dr. Emmett W. Bassett School School Number 119 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Michele Montana Coach Joan Giardina ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kandis Rivera Teacher/Subject Area Alison Ko /ENL 3rd Teacher/Subject Area Serafina Silletta/ENL Kinder Related-Service Provider Vanessa Dillelo Superintendent Dr. Karen Ames Assistant Principal Giulliano Quesada Coach n/a School Counselor Felix Polanco / Carmen Marrero Parent Amalia Alvarez Parent Coordinator Lourdes Flores Field Support Center Staff Member Caterina DiTillio Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 8 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 9 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 53  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 861 Total number of ELLs 307 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 35.66% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): n/a If yes, indicate language(s): n/a Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Lang. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments used to guide instructional planning for literacy include Fountas and Pinnell, TCRWP pre and post writing assessments, i-ready assessments in ELA and Math and Fundations Unit Tests. The Go Math Unit Tests, KEMS quick checks and teacher-created assessments are used to guide instructional planning in Math. These assessments provide information on the child's proficiency in phonics, fluency, comprehension, conventions, and spelling. The assessments help assign students to reading levels that reflect their ability to read and comprehend texts. Each level reflects special challenges and "next steps" for the instructor.This allows teachers to differentiate and to set goals for individual children and groups of children. The New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL) and the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) give us information on student proficiency levels to further guide in instructional planning and monitor each child's progress in English language acquisition. 2018-19 CEP 54  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The Integrated ENL Co-Teaching Model helps guide instructional planning for ELLs. Classes are designated as "ENL" where students receive instruction from both the content teacher and ENL teacher. Both the content teacher and ENL teacher give assessments and work collaboratively to analyze data and use it to guide and plan differentiated instruction and next steps. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ELL Periodic Assessment, which is administered twice a year, is used to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need. In addition, students are given i-Ready ELA and Math assessments three times a year to track baseline, growth, and next steps. Teachers analyze the data to identify strengths, weaknesses, areas of growth and areas in need of improvement for each student. Results from these assessments are used to place students into instructional groups, provide AIS/RTI services, and refer for enrichment/supplemental programs. Areas in need of most support are writing and reading. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered to identify baseline, progress, or areas of need, students are placed in various groups. Content teachers and ENL teachers collaborate to form groups within their classrooms. In addition, Academic Intervention Services groups are formed, as well as Response To Intervention groups. Students are also chosen to participate in enrichment programs or other academic intervention programs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In order to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework, many forms of evidence regarding individual students are considered, such as: The number of years students have in the NYC school system Their English language proficiency as evidenced through the latest NYSESLAT scores The degree of proficiency in their home language Additional evidence in the form of student work and curriculum based assessments is provided by the classroom teachers, which may include: Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment levels, Teachers College On Demand Writing Pieces and end of unit assessments, other content area quizzes and tests. The RTI Team analyzes the samples of student work and classroom assessment data, as evidence of student progress and to target areas in need of improvement. Data such as Teacher's College Writing Pre and Post Assessments are analyzed monthly using the Thin Slice protocol to identify students' strengths and areas for growth in an effort to derive an action plan for student success and target intervention along the components and elements of the Teacher's College Writing Rubric. When meeting with teachers, the team will asks questions, such as: What is the instruction this child has already received, including frequency and language, and what were the results? How have you differentiated instruction to help make it accessible to the student? What are the Tier 1 supports this child has already been given? How is progress being monitored and measured? Are there other factors that can be influenced, such as increasing student motivation and building self confidence? All of the above is considered and then a decision is made regarding RTI supports. An RTI plan is put in place and progress monitoring begins, to ensure the needs of the learner are being met and that the student is making the expected gains. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The results from the NYSESLAT test help inform and create our ELL programs. The ELL Periodic Assessment scores are evaluated and also used in this process, as well as information taken from the State ELA and Math exams. 2018-19 CEP 55  The 2017 NYSESLAT indicates that the majority of our students made significant gains. After reviewing the results, it was decided that we will continue to focus on strengthening students in the areas of writing and reading comprehension. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data Analysis is performed once information is received to form classes and groups within classes. Information is shared between content teachers and ENL teachers to collaborate and make adjustments to programs through regularly scheduled data meetings (upon completion of units of study, for example). Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for ELLs is delivered using the Integrated ENL Co-Teaching Model. Heterogeneously mixed grouping is used to create ENL classes where each class has students ranging in all language proficiency levels. Students in the ENL classes are taught by both the content teacher and the ENL teacher. ENL teachers are scheduled to be in classrooms every day for a minimum of 50 minutes, which allows students to receive more than the minimum amount of mandated minutes. Stand alone ENL is provided by the ELL Coordinators and students are grouped according to grade or grade level band. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL students are serviced using both the Integrated and Stand Alone models of instruction. Integrated ENL service is provided in ELA by an ENL teacher, assigned to each of the grade levels. Entering and Emerging students, requiring Stand Alone ENL, are serviced by the ELL Coordinators, in accordance to the mandates. The majority of our ELL students are receiving ENL services in excess of the mandates. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL Alignment Matrix is used to give ENL students access to the curriculum by identifying linguistic demands, language objectives, and scaffolds that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and grade level academic demands. Instruction is given in English, using native language connections whenever possible. The instructional co-teaching models used by teachers include parallel teaching, team teaching, and station teaching. Flexible grouping and small group instruction is used to make content comprehensible and foster language development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 CEP 56  Upon registration, new students are informally interviewed and assessed for their English language proficiency. If deemed eligible for testing, based on the interview and the HLIS, these students are administered the NYSITELL. Spanish speaking students who do not score at the Commanding level on the NYSITELL, are then assessed in their native language and are administered the Spanish Lab, within 10 days of enrollment. The results of the Spanish Lab are analyzed to lend insight as to the students current academic levels in their L1. During the school year, students are provided translators or language appropriate assessments when state tests are administered. Students are continuously tested in their native language (Spanish) through the online program, Imagine Learning. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status When teaching students who are identified as being Sife, Newcomers, or Developing, instruction is differentiated in many ways. Sife and Newcomer students are given manipulatives to work with when available and appropriate for the lesson. Many visuals and various types of graphic organizers are also utilized. Instruction at this stage integrates oral practice with literacy awareness using read-aloud, shared reading, and guided reading and writing. Scaffolds such as sentence frames and think-pair-share are commonly used in everyday lessons. In addition, drawing and labeling pictures to help with expressing ideas is used often. Lessons targeted for Developing, Long Term and Former ELLs are also differentiated. Activities taken from "The GO TO Strategies: Scaffolding Options for Teachers of English Language Learners, K-12" are used to give these targeted groups access to the curriculum. The activities included focus on increasing student use of academic language, literacy, and vocabulary. They link background knowledge and culture to learning. Classroom interaction is promoted through group work and the utilization of routines and protocols to guide student discussion. These activities and routines increase comprehensible input and language output and stimulate higher order thinking and the use of learning strategies. In addition, students in all the groups stated above have access to programs such as Imagine Learning and i-Ready, which gear student instruction and goals based on individual needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use Fundations, Imagine Learning, Max Scholar, i-Ready and TCRWP. Teachers in our school have modified the literacy materials to make them more accessible to our ELL-SWDs by using a variety of graphic organizers, visuals, and videos and activities. Although modified, students are still participating in grade-level work as well as meeting grade levels standards. The use of Fundations accelerates their language acquisition level at the letter-sound and word level. The computer programs mentioned are reading and language based programs used to improve comprehension and vocabulary. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs receive instruction targeting their IEP goals through a variety of instructional models/structures, including: small group instruction, SETSS, and Integrated/Stand Alone ENL, provided by one of our ELL Coordinators, in accordance to the mandates. ELL-SWDs are invited to take part in enrichment programs for the purpose of improving their English language skills and increasing social interaction. Such programs include the Saturday ELLA Program (Literacy through the Arts), Next Jump After-School (enrichment/clubs) and our Title III program. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 57  We provide various intervention services for ELLs in ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science. For newcomer, developing, and Sife students experiencing difficulty with reading, the content and ENL teachers often articulate with the grade coaches and AIS teachers to assess their concerns and then collaborate on the lesson planning. For ELA, the ENL teachers prepare lessons with scaffolds and different entry points to make the curriculum more accessible. They also pull students for small group instruction and hold individual conferences during the ELA workshops. ELLs also receive support through AIS for both ELA and Math and the ELLA Saturday Academy that focuses on Literacy through the Arts. The Title 3 After School Supplemental program is also offered to these ELL subgroups to reinforce skills learned throughout the school day. All of these services and interventions are provided in English and the native language is used whenever possible. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We plan to develop a new program to target Sife students and newcomers in order to make the curriculum accessible and to promote oral language and vocabulary as well as phonemic awareness. ENL teachers will be assigned to work with one grade level versus grade bands to focus more specifically on the skills for that particular grade. TCRWP Units will be modified using the ENL Alignment Matrix which highlights linguistic demands, language objectives, and scaffolds that are aligned to the CCLS and grade level demands. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of our ELLs in Grades 2- 5 are strongly encouraged to join the Saturday ELLA Program. ELLs in grades K-5 are invited to attend the Title 3 After School Program which focuses on vocabulary and language acquisition through technology and read-alouds. Kindergarten Academy is offered to Kindergarten students on Saturdays. Next Jump is another after school program that is offered to ELLs in grades ranging from K to 5. In the 2017-18 school year, PS 119 will have a Beacon Program which will be offer after-school programming to support both academic tutoring, enrichment activities and recreational needs of children. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use Imagine Learning to assess and target students' individual language development needs across the four modalities. Smartboards allow us to show video content on websites such as BrainPop and Bookflix. We have ipads with a variety of literacy programs. We use Fundations phonics program for phonemic awareness. We use RAZ KIDs for independent reading comprehension as well as i-Ready ELA, Imagine Learning, and Max Scholar. We also use i-Ready Math to reinforce mathematical skills and vocabulary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our Integrated and Stand Alone ENL classes, materials are translated whenever possible. Bilingual texts are used when appropriate. Teachers have access to i-pads and often use translation apps to support the lesson. Students are able to use their home language as a support when using both the i-Ready and Imagine Learning programs. ENL teachers encourage newcomer students to discuss content in their L1, while they are acquiring the language necessary to respond in English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are placed in heterogeneously mixed classes based on NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. Stand Alone groups are created based on proficiency levels and grade levels and serviced by ELL providers. Content and ENL teachers meet weekly to to plan and modify lessons based on student needs. Units are modified using the ENL Alignment Matrix to assure that lessons target linguistic demands and language objectives with scaffolds that are aligned to the CCLS and grade level demands. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP 58  We have technology rooms in both locations to ensure that students have access to online programs such as Imagine Learning, i-Ready, Max Scholar, Brain Pop, Bookflix, RazKids, and Reading A-Z. Resources such as books (teacher guides, student books) and CDs are provided in both locations. Teachers meet weekly in both locations to plan lessons and discuss next steps. In some grades, teachers use lending libraries where books are circulated through classes on a monthly basis. MYLIBRARY , a lending program of the New York Public Library system, is widely used by teachers on all grade levels. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Lourdes Flores, the Parent Coordinator, along with content and ENL teachers provide workshops to inform parents of grade level academic expectations,. Monthly "Tea with the Principal" also allow parents to gather informally with the Principal to talk about issues of importance to them (Arabic, Bengali and Spanish interpreters are available). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers will be given support in the form of professional development from different outlets. Beginning with the initial Chancellor's Day in September, all teachers of ELLs will attend in-house workshops led by the Bronx Field Support Center Liaison or the Instructional Coach, specifically focusing on best practices and strategies to immerse our ELLs in the curriculum. On Monday afternoon during Professional Development time, the school conducts in-house workshops and one Monday a month, the teachers of ELLs meet. During this time, the teachers turn-key any workshops they have attended outside school and discuss good practices and challenges. All ELL personnel are encouraged to attend workshops offered by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support, such as Grant Writing Workshop to Improve ELL Education, Language and the Brain, and the American Institute for Research: Units for Beginner ELLs. Our Network ELL Instructional Specialist provides support and guidance to strengthen our ENL department. ENL teachers are also receiving professional development in writing instruction through TCRWP that is turn-keyed by colleagues who attend the workshops. There is also staff development provided by a consultants from the National Training Network, Generation Ready, and I-ready. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers at PS 119 attend ELL specific professional development during the school year through the various professional development opportunities offered, both at the school level and BFSC. The Instructional Cabinet with the Professional 2018-19 CEP 59  Development Team meet to plan professional learning that will help ENL teachers meet the 50% requirement. To further meet the requirements, teachers are offered opportunities and encouraged to partake in professional development at other locations when available. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We invite parents of ELLs to join us every Tuesday during parent engagement periods. Tuesday parent time is referred to as an Open House and it is a time when parents can come and discuss their child's progress, as well as address any concerns and give suggestions that they may have. Parent Orientation meetings are also held throughout the year, to welcome parents of newly registered students to PS 119 and to inform them of their program selection options, as well as inform parents of their child's NYSITELL score. The ELL Coordinators are planning information sessions to discuss the results of the NYSESLAT with parents of ELLs. During these sessions we will also discuss ways to support English language acquisition outside of school and highlight some of the community resources available to our families. Interpreters are available at all formal meetings, including the School Leadership Meetings and Parent Association Meetings. The DOE interpretation phone services are available for all meetings as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS 119 makes it a priority to reach out to the parents of ELLs, to build a bridge over language and cultural divides. Parents of ELLs are invited on trips which include visits to places such as the Chinese Consulate, the NY Historical Society, Museums, and outdoor events. Parents are offered opportunities to volunteer upon teacher request. The parent coordinator holds parent workshops to address the needs of students and families. She also conducts weekly English language classes for Arabic, Bengali and Spanish speaking parents. Additional adult ESL classes are offered to parents and people in the community in a partnership with the Office of Adult Education. Invitations (translated into the home language) are sent to parents for school concerts, talent shows, and honors assemblies throughout the year. Additionally, this school year we are planning a Multicultural Night, where parents, students, and staff will come together to share traditional foods, dances, songs, and stories of their cultures. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Michele Montana, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 119 School DBN: 08X119 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Michele Montana Title Principal Giulliano Quesada Assistant Principal Lourdes Flores Parent Coordinator Kandis Rivera ENL/Bilingual Teacher Amalia Alvarez Parent Serafina Silletta Teacher/Subject Area Kathleen Behrens Teacher/Subject Area Joan Giardina Robbin Kelly Coach Coach Carmen Marrero School Counselor Karen Ames Caterina DiTillio Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Yes Other n/a Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X119 School Name: PS 119 Superintendent: Dr. Erik The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lourdes Flores Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We assess the number of families who prefer communication in languages other than English throughout the school year. In September, we survey our current families for language preference, during our Meet and Greet event and new PS 119 families are screened during registration for language preference. The supervising school aide compiles language preference data, gathered from ATS reports (RHLA), parent surveys and student blue cards, to provide copies of translated documents, such as parent letters and flyers, to families in their preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 64  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Bhili Chinese Fulani Mandinka Nahuatl English Spanish Urdu Vietnamese 43 166 3 12 1 0 5 1351 240 1 1 2.36 9.11 0.16 0.66 0.05 0 0.27 74.11 13.17 .05 .05 42 167 3 12 0 1 5 1349 242 1 1 2.3 9.16 0.16 0.66 0 .05 .27 74 13.27 .05 .05 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Student Handbook September Parent Letters September to June How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The Language Access Coordinator will ensure translation of documents by sending the handbook to the Translation and Interpretation Unit during the month of August. The Language Access Coordinator will ensure translation of documents, by forming a team of bilingual volunteers, who work together to translate the letters. All parent faced documents can be translated by the Translation and 2018-19 CEP 65  SLT Announcements September to June PTC Announcement September to June Event Invitations September to June Interpretation Unit in the 9 covered languages all other languages and student specific information can be translated by a DOE vendor. Documents can also be read to parents using over the phone interpretation. The Language Access Coordinator will ensure translation of documents, by forming a team of bilingual volunteers, who work together to translate the announcements. All parent faced documents can be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit in the 9 covered languages all other languages and student specific information can be translated by a DOE vendor. Documents can also be read to parents using over the phone interpretation. The Language Access Coordinator will ensure translation of documents by submitting documents for translation to the Translation and Interpretation Unit in the 9 covered languages all other languages and student specific information can be translated by a DOE vendor. Documents can also be read to parents using over the phone interpretation. The Language Access Coordinator will ensure translation of these documents by submitting parent faced documents to the Translation and Interpretation Unit in the 9 covered languages all other languages and student specific information can be translated by a DOE vendor. Documents can also be read to parents using over the phone interpretation. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 66  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open House Night September Parent-Teacher Conferences November, March, Tuesdays during Parent Time Parent Workshops September to June Parent Association Meetings September to June interpretation service(s)? The Language Access Coordinator has a network of volunteers that will be present for interpretation services. All parent faced documents can be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit in the 9 covered languages all other languages and student specific information can be translated by a DOE vendor. Documents can also be read to parents using over the phone interpretation. The Language Access Coordinator has a network of volunteers that will be present for interpretation services. All parent faced documents can be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit in the 9 covered languages all other languages and student specific information can be translated by a DOE vendor. Documents can also be read to parents using over the phone interpretation. The Language Access Coordinator has a network of volunteers that will be present for interpretation services. All parent faced documents can be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit in the 9 covered languages all other languages and student specific information can be translated by a DOE vendor. Documents can also be read to parents using over the phone interpretation. The Language Access Coordinator has a network of volunteers that will be present for interpretation services. All parent faced documents can be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit in the 9 covered languages all other languages and student specific information can be translated by a DOE vendor. 2018-19 CEP 67  Guidance Counselor Meetings with Parents September to June IEP Meetings September to June Documents can also be read to parents using over the phone interpretation. The Language Access Coordinator has a network of volunteers that will be present for interpretation services. All parent faced documents can be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit in the 9 covered languages all other languages and student specific information can be translated by a DOE vendor. Documents can also be read to parents using over the phone interpretation. The Language Access Coordinator will provide access to families via thethe Translation and Interpretation Unit in the 9 covered languages all other languages and student specific information can be translated by a DOE vendor. Documents can also be read to parents using over the phone interpretation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. PS 119 has a multilingual staff. In the event of an emergency, a staff member who speaks the parent's preferred language, provides the parental outreach. PS 119 will also utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit Hotline to communicate with families, who speak languages which are not spoken by our in-house staff. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During the first two days of school, teachers will attend a professional development on communicating with parents. They will be provided with a copy of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and a copy of the LTI to become familiar with the procedures we have in place for providing interpretation and translation services to our families. All staff will also receive a copy of the informational flyer regarding access to interpretation services. In addition, a large poster will be displayed in each main office, in various languages, to inform parents that there are interpretation services, if they need to communicate in a language other than English. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Parent Coordinator creates a Welcome Poster which displays many different languages and informs parents of the translation/interpretation services available to them. This poster is displayed in the main lobby of each building where the parents can see it upon entrance. Each parent is provided with a copy of the Parent Bill of Rights and Responsibilities in their preferred language. The School Safety Plan contains an addendum outlining how parents in need of language access services may receive these services. We access the DOE Translation and Interpretation Website to find translated signs guiding parents to services. The Parent Coordinator's room provides language access services to families in need. We also have school staff and a network of volunteers, who are able to communicate with parents in their native language and make them aware of the language services available to them. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent survey, parent meetings facilitated by Parent Coordinator and ENL Teachers/Coordinators, talking partners and focus groups. Tuesday Parent Time, ENL Coordinators will facilitate open houses for parents who speak various languages. Parents will be able to come in and speak to teachers and staff, or have their questions answered, in their preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 69 
