2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X121 School Name: P.S. 121 THROOP Principal: GLORIA MARTINEZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 11x121 Throop 321100010121 Pre K-5 2750 Throop Avenue, Bronx N.Y. 10469 718-654-2055 Phone Number: 718-519-2613 Fax: Gloria Martinez Gmartin9@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Gloria Martinez Kaycee Thomas Laetica Clarke Michael Acevedo Diana Perez N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 11 Meisha Ross-Porter Superintendent: 1250 Throop Avenue, Bronx N.Y. 10469 Superintendent’s Office Address: mross@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-519-2620 Phone Number: District 11 FSC: 917-678-6460 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gloria Martinez Kaycee Thomas Laeticia Clarke Maria Rodriguez Diana Perez N/A N/A N/A Michael Acevedo Heather Rowell Brianne Curley *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher/Chairperson Member/ Teacher/Secretary Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nina Mesopotanese China Rivera Alethea Woodson Shevann Campbell Michael McCartney N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview At P.S. 121 we continue to create a safe, caring and warm environment in which students feel that they are part of a family. We stress the importance of catering to the individual needs of each child through differentiated support. We provide students with strong academic learning experiences with opportunities to engage in the arts. 2018-19 CEP 9  Vision Statement P.S. 121 is a school community devoted to creating an environment of motivated, lifelong learners. We believe that all students have the capacity to reach their highest potential. Through the ongoing development of collaborative teacher teams we will continue to build instructional expertise and content knowledge. Core Values  We provide opportunities for members of the school community to work collaboratively to improve instructional practices and create rigorous units of study.  We are committed to working with parents in order to build positive relationships.  We will identify and integrate resources and services from the community to strengthen school programs, family practices and student learning and development.  We believe in a positive behavior system that promotes safety, respect, and responsibility.  We will continue to search for opportunities to partner with outside agencies to provide varied experiences in the arts.  We believe students will thrive in a school community that is diverse and inclusive. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We continue to combine academics with the arts. We are currently in partnership with the organizations Dancing Classrooms, and the New York Chess & Games organization. We have art and music cluster teachers who work towards developing each student’s creative talents. In grades 3-5 our music teacher organizes a winter and spring concert. Our fifth grade band performs three times during the school year. We celebrate our students’ achievements with various awards presented throughout the school year. The awards include; Student of the Month, Super Throoper Scholar Certificates for Academic Excellence or Effort, Chess Tournament Trophies, 100% Attendance Award, Community Service Awards, Artist of the Month, basketball trophies, and the opportunity to participate in various contests. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our students with disabilities and English language learners continue to make minimal progress in both literacy and math. We must strengthen our intervention strategies, programs, and ability to differentiate based on data. For example, we have added the Orton-Gillingham instructional approach to teach reading skills. We started the program with general education kindergarten students, some ENL students, and students with disabilities. However, we have now added all the grades so that at-risk students can utilize different components of the program. The SETSS (Special Education Teacher Support Services) teachers are currently implementing the program. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School strengths, accomplishments, challenges Strengths/Accomplishments In order to support our students as they are faced with a more rigorous curriculum, we continue to incorporate the reading, math, and writing workshop model. The workshop model predominately incorporates differentiated, small group instruction based on data. We have an after-school program to provide academic intervention for students performing below grade level. We also provide a morning intervention program for English language learners. We continue to incorporate technology through the use of Ipads, smart boards and interactive computer programs. Teacher teams have become an invaluable support system that continues to improve. The majority of teams have 2018-19 CEP 10  developed systems for effective planning. We are incorporating more technology by the ongoing use of Google Drive files for teams to upload agendas, next steps, etc. We continue to incorporate educational computer software programs such as; Imagine learning, MYON Reader, ST Math, and IXL. We incorporate math games and manipulatives to target diverse learning styles. Challenges: Further development is needed in using data effectively to differentiate instruction in order to meet the needs of diverse learners. Teacher teams will engage in looking at student work, and ongoing assessment data to make adjustments to the curriculum and instructional practices. Establishing systems for monitoring the progress of students and incorporating strategies to check for understanding will be an integral part of our instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year. Through collaborative inquiry studies, academic intervention services, and varied professional development opportunities for teachers, we hope to improve the academic performance of our English language learners, students with disabilities, and students designated as performing below grade level. Areas in which your school made the most growth during the previous year . For the 2017-2018 school year, our status was designated as a school in “Good Standing.” The caliber of teacher teamwork has improved and has resulted in the implementation of more rigorous instructional practices. We continue to work on revising our units of study in both literacy and math. For the past three years we have incorporated STEM units in each grade. The results were very positive and we intend to implement these units again during the 2018-2019 school year. The school climate reflects a warm and caring atmosphere in which our students feel safe. We strive towards academic excellence with the belief that all students can learn. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X121 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 917 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 41 41 37 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 106 98 19 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 65.6% % Reduced Lunch 6.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 30.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 72% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 92.3% 1.1% 17.4% 55.9% 7.3% 1.0% 4 8% 8.4 31.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 Quality Review: ● The 2017-2018 Quality Review Report indicated a need to focus more on developing instructional practices and curriculum to address the needs of diverse learners so that “all students produce meaningful work products.” (QR 1.2) ● The area of celebration was in Teacher Support and Supervision. There was evidence that demonstrated how "school leaders support teachers, including new teachers, with feedback based on observations and analysis of student work." (QR 4.1) New York State English Language Arts and Math Assessment Data for Grades 3-5: ● The results of the 2018 New York State assessments in math and English language arts indicated a need for improvement in the number of students achieving proficiency levels 3 and 4. The results of the 2018 New York State assessments in math and English language arts indicated a need for Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners to show progress. P.S. 121 Needs Assessment: ● Need to continue to build teachers’ content and pedagogical knowledge of most effective strategies for catering to English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities in literacy and math instruction, including special education teachers and other providers (Rigorous Instruction/ Collaborative Teaching) ● Continue to incorporate and identify rigorous questioning using Webb’s Depth of Knowledge levels ● Develop and implement Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), Balanced Literacy units, embedding rich and rigorous performance tasks and CCLS rubrics. ● Continue to revise and implement math units incorporating a focus on the Mathematical Practices and higher order thinking through various levels of problem solving including, exemplar tasks and the CCLS aligned units of work and performance tasks 2018-19 CEP 13  ● Coach teachers as per identified needs in various aspects of balanced mathematics/literacy instruction using assessment to inform teaching and learning ● Conduct more ‘Looking at Student Work’ sessions with teachers to: analyze student work and align to Common Core Learning Standards, identifying gaps in curriculum content and teaching practice, analyzing student work of rich performance tasks and develop consistency of judgments utilizing CCLS aligned rubrics P.S. 121 Strengths: ● Ongoing teacher team meetings to revise and maintain English language arts and math pacing calendars aligned to the CCLS aligned units of work and performance tasks. ● Teacher team collaboration with coaches and supervisors to produce and revise units of study in both literacy and math. ● Ongoing professional development to address the needs of individual teachers. Coaches push into classes for the purpose of modeling best practices, coaching individual teachers, and providing immediate feedback. ● Individual sessions with teachers and coaches to analyze ongoing data to provide targeted instruction and flexible grouping. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of Pre k-5 teachers will revise, refine, implement and evaluate the “Understanding by Design” units of work to increase levels of cognitive rigor, higher order thinking skills and differentiation. As a result there will be a 7% increase of students meeting proficiency levels on the English Language Arts and Math New York State exams. 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers, Special Education Teachers, 9/5 /18-6/ 26 /19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Math Coach, Reading Coaches Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Literacy/Mathematics Curriculum ● Implement Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)aligned Literacy/Mathematics curriculum, embedded in Balanced Literacy and Mathematics practices- with a focus on “Looking at student work to drive instruction”(Instructional Focus for 2018/2019 ● Teachers utilize assessment information to inform daily intervention through Balanced Literacy/Mathematics components e.g. tiered lessons in Mathematics/Guided Math/ Guided Reading groups/Shared Reading ● Rigorous Balanced Literacy Components evident in each classroom: Guided Reading, Shared Reading, Read-Alouds, Independent Reading, Close Reading ● Rigorous Balanced Mathematics instruction evident in every classroom: Tiered differentiated workshop model lessons, Guided Math using assessment to inform groupings of students and appropriate activities, CCLS aligned problem solving, Cognitively Guided Instruction, Number Talks ● Time scheduled with coaches for developing clear plans for next steps within Balanced Literacy/Math components, utilization of data during conferencing, planning units of work and accounting for all students’ writing needs through differentiated activities ● Teachers work in grade level teams to adjust units of study to align to Balanced Literacy/Balanced Mathematics ● Small group strategy/Guided Reading/Guided Math lessons utilize data to meet specific instructional needs of students Subgroups: 2018-19 CEP 15  ENL teachers will meet with teachers to provide support in addressing the needs of English language learners; identifying students that are at-risk; embedding language objectives and scaffolds; providing support with resources such as Imagine Learning The SETSS teachers will provide support in planning scaffolded tasks in both literacy and math. Provide additional intervention resources such as; Fountas and Pinnell reading intervention program, Wright Group Reading kits, MYON Reader, Orton-Gillingham program Parent Engagement: Teachers will review the curriculum during the September parent orientation night. Parent workshops focused on the Common Core Learning standards will be provided by teachers The ENL teachers will conduct workshops with parents to address the needs of English language learners. The upper grade science teacher will familiarize parents with the NYS science exam and how to support their children. Classroom teachers will conduct workshops to support parents in their understanding of the state ELA and math assessments and how to help their children The Math Coach will conduct an interactive math night where parents will become familiar with the various strategies we use to teach math (ex. games, exemplars, CGI) Assessment Literacy/Mathematics ● Revise Whole School Assessment Frameworks in Literacy and Mathematics embedding revised, rigorous tasks and rubrics aligned and embed response to intervention assessment types- universal screening and progress monitoring ● Teacher Teams to check for rigor of all assessment tasks using Webb’s Depth of Knowledge Each unit of study will include "I can" statements based on the Common Core Learning Standards All teachers 9/ 5 /18-6/ Principal 26 /19 Assistant Principals Reading Coach Math Coach Data Specialist 2018-19 CEP 16  In alignment with the instructional focus, teacher teams will add "checks for understanding" strategies to monitor students' understanding throughout each lesson ● Embed these refined assessments in the Common Core Learning Standards aligned units of study ● Looking at Student Work Inquiry sessions with protocols ● Develop and establish Local and State Measures with Measures of Student Learning (MOSL)Teacher Team ● Monitor implementation of MOSL assessments ● Facilitate collaborative scoring of MOSL assessments to calibrate professional judgments B) Mathematics ● Professional learning sessions focused on inquiry work to address needs of Students with Disabilities and ELL students, involving analysis of data, development and implementation of math intervention plans to meet the needs of all learners ● Continue to revise “PS 121’s Math Handbook of Effective Teaching and Learning in Mathematics” to clarify high expectations ● Introduce and embed K-5 CCLS aligned Cognitively Guided Instruction (CGI) story problems twice a week with a focus on CCLS Math Practice of “Modeling with Mathematics”, to build deep understanding, fluency and coherency with reading, understanding, solving and representing all varieties of word problems ● Refine Number Talks further with a focus on modeling and representation of students’ strategies and questioning and discussion techniques i.e. Talk Moves to build student engagement and participation ● Investigate parent engagement Tuesday afternoon opportunities together with a focus on practical, hands-on family friendly math activities to support students’ learning of math at home and build parents’ knowledge of CCLS Mathematics content C) Literacy ● Professional learning sessions with each K-5 grade level teacher team to revise, refine, implement and evaluate the “Understanding by Design” units of work, lesson plans and assessments in literacy to ensure specific and explicit alignment All teachers 9/ 5 /18-6/ Principal 26 /19 Assistant Principal Data Specialist Math Coach All teachers 9/ 5 /18-6/ Principal 26 /19 Assistant Principals Data Specialist 2018-19 CEP 17  to CCLS as well as to increase levels of cognitive rigor, higher order thinking skills and differentiation with learning and assessment tasks ● " Looking at Student Work" sessions to further refine units of work ● Analysis of data to inform next steps in instruction. ● Teacher teams analyzing strengths, weaknesses, and trends to differentiate instruction D) Social Studies/Science Reading Coach Classroom Teachers 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 Principal  K-5 grade level teacher teams to continue to revise, refine and evaluate the social studies and/or science based integrated units of study to ensure multiple entry points for learning to meet the varied needs, as well as ensuring alignment to the Universal Design for Learning model (UDL) and Common Core Learning Standards Cluster Teachers Classroom Teachers 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 Cluster Teachers E) Technology/Digital Media  Professional Learning sessions with technology teacher e.g. Measures of Student Learning (MOSL,) morning and after-school workshops, training on Google Drive to support curriculum planning  Use of Google Drive collaborative files (pacing calendars, lesson plans, agendas, minutes, etc.)  Using Google Drive to upload Excel spreadsheets for assessment data and progress reports  Class websites for uploading homework, calendars, class  highlights, parent letters etc. ST Math computer program; MYON Reader online leveled library; Imagine Learning for English Language Learners; IXL computer program Assistant Principals Data Specialist Math Coach Reading Coach Principal Assistant Principals Data Specialist Math Coach Reading Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We intend to provide afternoon parent workshops during the Tuesday parent engagement time. Teachers from grades 3-5 will conduct workshops to familiarize parents with the NYS exam in both literacy and math. The math coach will conduct hands-on math workshops which would include math games and tiered tasks. Teacher teams will plan and implement various parent workshops on topics such as; Number Talks, Literacy Centers, Short Response Questions, 4th Grade NYS Science Test, MYON training, and Independent Reading at Home. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Math Coach, Reading Coach, Data Specialist/Technology Teacher, Academic Intervention Service Math Teacher Instructional Resources : PS 121’s Common Core Learning Standards aligned curriculum and assessment documents, PS 121’s Math Teaching and Learning Handbook, Schedule Adjustments: Professional Learning scheduled for Monday and Tuesday afternoons, One Common planning time per week Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mathematics/English Language Arts: By February 2019 there will be a 4% increase in the number of grade 3-5 students scoring proficiency levels on the Common Core Learning Standards Aligned winter assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Common Core Learning Standards Aligned winter assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 2017-2018 Quality Review ● In the final Quality Review Report we were given a rating of “proficient” for QR indicator 3.4. We continually communicate high expectations for all members of our school community. Needs Assessment /Analysis The 2017 Framework for Great Schools Report indicated the following percentage of responses: For Strong Family-Community Ties the percentage of positive responses was 89% in 2016-2017 and 92% in 2017-2018. We made improvement in this component. One area of need was related to student behavior. Teachers commented that there was a need for help with students resolving conflicts and that they needed further help with addressing student behavior issues. This includes the need to continue to build teachers’ proactive behavior management skills and strategies. These skills are foundational to facilitating a supportive and positive school environment and climate which caters for all students’ academic as well as social and emotional needs. Summary of strengths/needs ● According to a recent attendance report, our attendance was improving from 91.78% in 2013-2014 to 94% for 2015-2016. However, in 2016-2017 there was a decrease from 94% to 93%. We are currently planning more incentives to improve attendance and parent awareness concerning the importance of consistent attendance in school. ● Data indicates need to analyze the School Culture and Systems for Improvement scores more fully to ascertain needs of parents and teachers (Supportive Environment) ● Our analysis of data revealed that we needed to increase teachers and parents shared understandings of effective proactive and positive behavior management techniques, to develop “positive proactive classrooms” in every classroom in our school (Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers) ● Need to build student leadership forums (Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers). The 2018 NYS English language arts data showed a slight decrease of students achieving proficiency levels. 2018-19 CEP 20  The 2018 NYS Math data showed an increase of students achieving proficiency levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of staff will be involved in reviewing, refining and implementing a re-development of 11X121’s Whole School Behavior Management Plan to create a positive and inclusive school environment. As a result, the Supportive Environment rating in the NYC School Survey will increase by 5%. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Review and refine PS 121’s Whole School Behavior Management consistent school-wide positive behavior management strategies, focused on each classroom as well as for outside-classroom behaviors- Responsive Classroom practices Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, 9/5/18-6/ 26 /19 Principal Assistant Principals ● Ongoing Professional Learning on PBIS techniques for each classroom/cluster teacher/ paraprofessional (see Professional Learning Plan) Paras PPC Team PBIS Team ● Follow-Up with implementation school-wide through actionable feedback during informal and formal observations ● Implement a social/emotional program school wide to build a common language and strategies focusing on building positive relationships with peers and adults. (ex. Open Circle) ● Continue to refine, revise and monitor behavior management practices to ensure common shared understanding and positive discipline practices ● Communication with parents- expectations- parents’ roles and responsibilities, model class meeting at first parent teacher conference ● Professional learning sessions- Sept/Oct for team to develop draft of Whole School Behavior Management Plan. Refine/edit the PBIS framework for whole school decision-making and consensus ● Establish student leader forum (ex. Fourth and Fifth Grade Student Houses) Students who fall into the Tier 3 category, representing about 5% of the student population, will receive an individual behavior plan. This plan is created by the Crisis Intervention Team and the classroom teachers. Teachers Parents Students 9/ 5 /18-6/ 26 /19 Principal Assistant Principals PBIS Team Crisis Intervention Team 2018-19 CEP 22 Weekly PBIS team will meet to monitor the implementation of the school, class, and bus matrices. Currently we are collecting data through Google Forms and developing a tracking system. Create an Equity and Excellence team to implement and monitor initiatives for improving the school culture. Specifically the fourth and fifth grade student houses, staff professional development (ex. Recognizing implicit bias and the impact on student achievement), and focusing on a target group (African-American, hispanic males) staff parents students 9/5/18 - 6/26/18 Principal, assistant principal, guidance counselor, health consultant, teachers, parent coordinator, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will plan workshops for parents focusing on anti-bullying and promoting positive behaviors. In September, we will send home copies of the school, class, and bus matrices in the Parent Handbook. The parents will also receive a description of our PBIS behavior management framework, and how students can earn "Tiger Bucks" to purchase incentives. During the school year we will have fundraisers to generate funds for the Tiger Bucks store. For example, two family movie nights in which the parents pay for tickets and snacks. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : PPC and PBIS Team, classroom teachers, cluster teachers, coaches, Principal and Assistant Principal Instructional resources : PBIS resources, sample Behavior Management Plans based on Citywide Discipline Code and rights, rules and responsibilities model Schedule adjustments - Professional learning sessions for behavior management organized, allocation of professional learning time for teachers, paraprofessionals, cluster teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be a 20% decrease in the number of daily infractions as measured by the PBIS data tracking system. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PBIS Data Tracking System Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Summary of Strengths and Needs ● Data indicates need to continue to focus on differentiation, particularly for English language learners (ELLs), students with disabilities (SWD) and Lowest Performing sub groups. (Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teaching) ● Using our 2018- 2019 instructional focus, “Implementing "checks for understanding" strategies and Looking at Student Work to Drive Instruction” as a vehicle to meet all students’ needs (Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teaching) ● The use of teacher teams (grade level and vertical) to build shared understandings of effective differentiation across content areas and build teachers’ content and pedagogical knowledge (Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teaching) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will receive actionable feedback through frequent cycles of formal and informal classroom observations based on a research-based Teacher Effectiveness framework (Danielson). As a result, 50% of teachers will show improvement as measured in an increase in the number of Danielson Framework Measures of Teacher Practice HEDI points. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Professional Learning Plan to detail all professional learning aligned to each of the goals All Teachers Grade Teams 9/ 5 /18-6/ 26 /19 P.S. 121 Professional Learning Team Principal Assistant Principal Math Coach ● Monday professional learning of teacher teams focused on data based Inquiry sessions, using data to drive more specific and targeted intervention daily. These cycles will be determined by teachers’ analysis of data in literacy and math to build efficacy and teacher empowerment in decision-making in professional learning. ● Work in grade level teams to build understanding of: - using literacy data to inform next steps in targeted and effective literacy instruction to best meet the specific needs of all students -using math data to inform next steps in targeted and effective math instruction to best meet the specific needs of all students ● Professional learning with external consultancies focused on building teachers’ content knowledge and crafting effective pedagogy to meet the needs of ALL learners, particularly ELL’s and SWD’s. These cycles will incorporate and embed PS 121’s instructional focus of “Looking at Student Work to Drive Instruction”, aligned to Danielson’s component 1E, 3c, and 3d on the Teaching Effectiveness Framework ● Continue professional development support for Special Education teachers (Integrated Co-Teaching Teams, paraprofessionals, and support providers) in order to strengthen instruction and improve outcomes for Students With Disabilities (SWD’s) ● Develop schedules for formal and informal observations with teachers including timely actionable feedback 2018-19 CEP 26  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. On a weekly basis teachers will reach out to parents during the Tuesday parent engagement time as well as prep periods. In addition, parents will receive three report cards during the school year. In January we also provide a progress report. Parents will have access to the school website as well as their child's class website in order to find information about upcoming events. The class websites usually include homework assignments, trip information, and parent letters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Literacy Consultants, Math Coach, Reading Coach, Math Consultant, Technology Teacher Instructional Resources : PS 121 CCLS aligned curriculum and assessment documents, PS 121 Math Teaching and Learning Handbook, Rubrics from Danielson’s Teaching Effectiveness Framework, NYCDOE Professional Learning Handbook, Power of Teacher Teams (Bowles & Troen), K-2 Math Stations (Debbie Diller), Van De Walle’s Math text Schedule adjustments : Labsites for professional learning scheduled for math and literacy Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 50% of teachers will show improvement in Domain 1 as measured by an increase in the number of Danielson Framework measures of Teacher Practice HEDI points. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Informal and formal Advance observations which include feedback and next steps within a specified time frame. Individual Measures of Teacher Practice reports (MOTP Score Tracker)) as well as School Level MOTP summary reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment & Analysis The New York City School Survey : There is an ongoing need for further involvement and awareness of strategic decision-making with teacher leaders. Teacher leadership has been a developing focus at PS 121 and there is a need to refine these processes further to maximize teacher involvement and efficacy. Summary of School’s Strengths and Needs According to the New York City School Survey the percentage of positive responses was 74%. In order to increase the positive responses of teachers we plan to... ● Continue to build school culture through collaborative decision-making teacher teams (Effective School Leadership) ● Empower teacher teams to lead other teachers in monitoring of the Comprehensive Education Plan and our instructional focus. (Effective School Leadership) Continue to include teachers in decisions regarding curriculum, resources and establishing partnerships with outside arts organizations. (Effective School Leadership) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, the principal will continue to build distributive and collaborative leadership structures involving teachers, paraprofessionals, students, coaches and administrators. As a result, the percentage of positive responses for Effective School Leadership on the New York City School Survey will improve by 10%. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Continue to refine processes of teacher leadership within Professional Development Teams- clarify roles and responsibilities, document teacher leadership processes in strategic planning/decision-making Professional Learning Team 9/ 5 /18-6/ 26 /19 Professional Learning Team Principal Establish grade level team calendars to assign and rotate various roles (ex. facilitator, recorder, etc.) ● Grade Level Teacher Teams- every team to establish norms for working together collaboratively on Monday and Tuesday professional learning time, monitoring professional learning cycles and adjusting/adapting as needed Grade Level Teacher Teams teachers Teachers attending workshops in order to "turn key" the information to the staff; teachers visiting other schools to observe best practices as well as inter-grade visitations Universal Literacy and math coaches will work with specific teachers to create labsites. These teachers will model the implementation of the workshop model in reading and math. Labsite teachers will share data collection systems and how they use their data to differentiate instruction for small group lessons. SETSS teachers will have bi-weekly meetings to monitor the progress of students with disabilities. They will discuss possible strategies and resources based on current data sources. SETSS teachers will also provide curriculum support during teacher team meetings to assist in differentiating lessons to target the needs of students with disabilities. ● PBIS team to develop whole school proactive plan, embedding positive classroom practices and empowering teacher leadership in strategic decision making staff Assistant Principals 9/ 5 /18-6/ 26 /19 Principal Assistant Principals, math coach peer collaborative teacher, Universal Literacy Coach 9/ 5 /18-6/ 26 /19 Principal Assistant Principals PBIS Team 2018-19 CEP 29 ENL teachers will provide professional development during our Monday PD time teachers 9/5/18- 6/26/19 Ms. Elmore, Ms.Massaro The PTA has designated parents to act as grade facilitators to help teachers in each grade organize student and parent events (ex. fundraisers, incentive events, trips, etc.) students teachers PTA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Informative monthly PTA meetings in which the principal reports on various school wide initiatives. For example, during the school year parents can track their child's progress in MYON (online reading program) Parents are invited to the School Leadership Team meetings once a month. There are opportunities for parents to volunteer in the school. For example, we will have one or two Scholastic Book Fairs to raise funds for the school. Parents volunteer to help organize and sell the books. We have trained parent volunteers who assist teachers and students during the school day. They have received training from the Learning Leaders Program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources : Professional Learning Team/ Grade level teacher teams/ SIT/PPC Team Instructional Resources : Professional Learning Handbook, setting norms and protocols for Inquiry work information, PBIS resources Schedule adjustments : Organize Behavior Management Meetings- venue/facilitation etc Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, we will monitor the progress of effective school leadership by administering the same questions from the school environment survey using a 1-4 rubric. The baseline score is the 2018 rating (2.19.) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 30  Staff surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment/Analysis The 2017-2018 NYC School Survey score indicated that while 87% of parents were satisfied with the opportunities for parent involvement, however there is still a need to increase parent attendance at Parent-Teacher Association meetings. There are a number of extra-curricular activities and services available at PS 121 so there appears to be a need to further build and strengthen our communication in a variety of ways. Strengths: ● We have continued to improve our methods for communicating with parents. We currently created a P.S. 121 App. In addition to our school and class websites, parent letters, the school App is another effective way for parents to get information.  Our partnership with the organization, Neighborhood Music and Arts, has provided many opportunities for parents to attend a variety of student performances across grades. The performances included theatre, vocal music, and dance.  We recently began a partnership with the organization, Learning Through an Expanded Art Program (LEAP). The organization provides various programs that combine content area subjects with the arts.  We will continue our partnership with Dancing Classrooms and the New York Chess and Games organization.   We also provided optometry services from an organization that provided free exams and eyeglasses. For three years we provided dental services through the program, Dental Smiles. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, there will be an increase of parent workshops and student-centered events within the school so that parents and families feel welcomed and encouraged to engage with the school and support student achievement. As a result, the school’s positive responses rating for Strong Family-Community Ties on the New York City School Survey will improve by 5%. 2018-19 CEP 32 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? P.S. 121 Parents 9/ 5 /18-6/ 26 /19 Principal Community Members Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Grade Level Teacher Teams School Leadership Team Data Specialist/Technology Cluster Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  ● Multi-layered parent workshops (linked to annual goals) Use of technology -ST Math “JiJi”, IXL, MyOn Reader, every month PTA meetings with principal and PTA recap, Positive Behavior Management framework, English Language Arts Parent workshop, Math Parent workshop ● Curriculum night- all teachers sharing best practices , goals and expectations ● P.S. 121 staff and the parent coordinator to provide workshops for parents. ● Class web sites will be strengthened so that parents can access it more freely for educational resources (see Rigorous Instruction- Literacy/ Media /Technology section) ● Parent Coordinator/Curriculum Teams/Classroom Visits/ /Parent Appreciation Day breakfast ● College & Career Readiness : Career Day- parents and community members share their careers through discussion ● Technology teacher to lead the ongoing updating of the PS 121 website to ensure greater communication with parents electronically, incorporating variety of multi-media tools ● Class webpages for every class, maintained and regularly updated with current curriculum focus, homework, class celebratory activities, parent invitations etc. ● Parents involved decision-making processes with students with IEP’s: programming adaptations, IEP goals and achievements, and involved in planning next steps ● Close liaison with parents to monitor each student’s progress 2018-19 CEP 33 ● Meetings with every parent of child with IEP, by October 2018. progress reports given in January. Report cards distributed three times during the school year (November, March, June) ● Ongoing progress monitoring meetings throughout the school year 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We continue to work with a NYC Thrives health consultant. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Parent Coordinator, parent volunteers, Learning Leaders, Community Resources, Instructional Resources: Technology cluster/Data Specialist with parent coordinator regarding website, Schedule Adjustments : Close liaison with parent coordinator to organize schedules of workshops and family events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019: School Leadership Team- Mid Year survey with parents to check on progress and needs which will include New York City School Survey items: Strong Family-Community Ties, Supportive Environment, and Effective School Leadership. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction and individual conferencing provided byclassroom teachers; small group pull out/push inprogram provided by two AISreading teachers Small group instruction, guided math, individual conferencing based on need provided by the classroom teacher; small group pull out/push inprogram provided by AIS Math Teacher Small group instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and after school test preparation program During the school day and after school in a test preparation program During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Baseline assessments, in writing, benchmark assessments in reading, ELA units of study diagnostics, summatives, formative assessments, teacher observations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided reading and writing, individual conferences during intervention time, after-school test preparation program, Fountas and Pinnell intervention program Mathematics Math culminating tasks, exemplars, teacher observations Interactive math games, manipulative, Number Talks,Cognitively Guided Instruction. Hands on work to reinforce the unit, Amplify Science curriculum Science Social Studies Integrated ELA/Science units of study diagnostics, summatives, formative assessments, teacher observations ELA/Social studies units of study diagnostics, summatives, formative Instruction is embedded into units of study to provide a Work is tiered based on ability and need. Instruction is small group, integrated reading writing During the school day 2018-19 CEP 35  assessments, teacher observations framework for instruction At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) PPC team, teacher recommendations, parent request, IEP evaluations Counseling, behavior management strategies workshop using: leveled informational books, big books, close reading, guided reading Individual/small group During the school day 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have 68 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We plan to provide after- school academic programs for students in grades 3-5. We will also provide morning programs for English language learners. We generally provide students with uniforms and school supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Check for appropriate license on the NYS certificate holder website, investigate prior experiences working with students, recommendations from supervisors, and include demonstration lessons in which teachers as well as administrators can observe. Create a hiring committee which includes coaches, teachers, and administrators. ● Perform regular informal and formal observations using a research based Teacher Effectiveness Framework (Danielson) to provide specific, actionable feedback regarding the components of effective teaching ● Reading Coach will provide push-in coaching, modeling, co-teaching, planning, scaffolding and support to individual teachers regarding the effective implementation of Balanced Literacy components of Guided Reading, Shared Text, Independent Reading, Read Alouds using a “gradual release of responsibility” coaching model. ● Mathematics and reading coach provide push-in coaching, modeling, co-teaching, planning, scaffolding and support to individual teachers regarding the effective implementation of Balanced Mathematics components of Tiered Workshop model lessons, Guided Math, Number Talks, Cognitively Guided Instruction Problem solving using a “gradual release of responsibility” coaching model 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Professional Learning Team- development of plan and schedule ● Math coach- in-classroom coaching: using a “gradual release of responsibility” model ● Push-in coaching, modeling, co-teaching with individual teachers 2018-19 CEP 39  ● Lunch ‘n Learn sessions- teachers are invited to voluntarily share lunch and build their content knowledge in Mathematics. To date this year, we have held sessions concerning mental math strategies, intervention models, and revising the curriculum ● Specific professional learning sessions with new teachers or teachers new to the grade to build content knowledge ● Grade level Teacher Team sessions- focused on revising units of work, planning more rigorous tiered, differentiated lessons, Looking at Student Work sessions to analyze students’ work, strengths and weaknesses trends to provide differentiated instruction, calibrate scoring using Common Core Learning Standards rubrics and scoring guides, developing plans for next steps for students with intervention ● Classroom inter-visitations to share best practices across grades ● Voluntary teacher videoing of best practices to share with teachers across grades Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). A range of plans is used to transition preschool children to the elementary school program: •Two transitional days in September where students come in on a half day basis to get to know the teacher, and to become familiar with the classroom environment. •Workshops for parents during the transitional days, describing the Pre-K program, acquainting them with the school, and giving them ideas to help their children transition into school life, and assimilate into PS 121. •Ongoing parent workshops, including parenting, literacy, math, nutrition all geared to parents of Pre-K students. 2018-19 CEP 40  •Open classroom policy. Parents are invited to spend time in the classroom as volunteers or observers. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams, consultants, coaches and administrators review the units of study in both literacy and math to make revisions as well as add new components. For the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to use the baseline assessments from last year which include the NYC performance tasks and the Common Core Learning Standards aligned assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 600,159 101,118 12,366 6.574 5,021,871 x X X x X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A-E, 6, 7 Section 8 Section 5E, 6 Section 4B Section 5A-E, 6 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 41  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 42   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S.121, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent - Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S.121 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, New York City School Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S.121 ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 46  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● always try my best to learn: ● always follow my personal code. 2018-19 CEP 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Title III funds provided for the 2018-2019 school year will be allocated towards an after school extended day program. This program will begin October 15th and run through to March 11th. There will be 36 session in total. Two Certified ENL teachers, in conjunction with 2 content area teachers, will provide targeted Intervention to all ENLs in the after school program. The ENL teachers will co-plan and co-teach with the 2 content area teachers in grades 3,4 and 5. The ENL after school will meet on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons from 2:30- 4:00, which will follow our school day running daily from 8:00 to 2:20. This instruction will be solely in English with some Native Language support for those Beginner learners who need it. This program will house all levels of ENL learners across the 3rd to 5th grades. Based on the data of the New York State English as a Second language Achievement Test proficiency levels, informal and formal reading assessments and teacher observation. Instruction for this program will focus on literacy (reading and writing) and math; using English as a Second Language methodologies to better prepare them for the New York State English as a Second language Achievement Test, English language arts and State Math Test. (Literacy Consultants from Generation Ready will be working throughout the school year with all teachers at PS121x.) In addition a listening component will enhance their ability to process the English Language using their auditory skills. Smart Board Technology and the computer program Imagine Learning will also be incorporated as well as a rotation of small group instruction focusing on the needs and skills that need to be strengthened and reinforced. Experts from, The Early Reading Matters Agency, will be working with the teachers of PS 121, inclusive of the teachers leading the Title III extended day program. The agency will hone in on differentiated instruction which will support our ENL learners. Smart Board Technology and Imagine Learning will be used to teach learners of different ages and levels to speak and understand the English language. Through the use of this technology it will help to assist and reinforce skills that are inclusive of the four modalities of Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing. Imagine Learning provides instruction through fun educational activities and repeated practice in the five essential components of reading: phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, fluency and comprehension . It provides lessons, educational games, activities and quizzes which all align with both the ENL Standards as well as NYS Common Core Standards. It provides a fun and interactive way for each child to further progress and support the academic gains of all ENL children while providing first language support in 13 languages. Small group instruction will be needs based for all levels of children. Differentiated Instruction will support literacy and math lessons. Leveled readers and math games will keep the children interested and actively involved in their learning. Lessons implemented will focus on the children’s reading and writing levels. Test prep activities such as listening exercises, grammar and phonics work will also be incorporated in the instruction to help all ENL children to make the necessary academic gains in their Writing to better perform on the NYSESLAT and other state tests. Based on the data of the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math Test scores our ENL population has been making positive gains in this area of need. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: To ensure that ENL students receive adequate instruction in order to acquire English proficiency, 2 certified ENL teacher have been appointed to provide services at P.S.121. The ENL teachers will receive professional ongoing training through workshops offered under the DOE to further develop their understanding of ESL methodologies and will turnkey that information to the classroom teachers. Through the Literacy Support Systems the ENL teachers along with the teachers whose classrooms house the ENL children and receive push in services will receive Professional Development. The Professional Development will take place on going throughout the year on the extended Tuesday afternoons starting 10/02/2018 (bi-weekly) until 6/10/2019. The ENL Teachers and the teachers whose classrooms receive push in/pull out services will meet regularly to discuss best practices to meet the needs of our ENLs. Through discussions we will brainstorm the next steps necessary to support those struggling. Strategies will be incorporated with in the classroom and we will reflect upon our findings. All teachers will work together to find ways to better support the ENLs in the four modalities of language acquisition: reading, writing, speaking and listening. * ST Math: An individualized standard based computer program that aides and assists children to master grade appropriate concepts. The generated data will assist in planning appropriate lessons to tailor to a specific area of need both individually and small group. * The Southern Cross Consultant Agency, Liz Irwin and Math Coach will model Early Childhood Assessment in Mathematics diagnostics as well as lead discussions in analyzing, planning and instruction. *Educational DVD of "Number Talks" will be viewed and discussed to better incorporate our ENLs in these meaningful discussions. * Imagine Learning will also be providing on site training to staff who will be using the software. The training will expose teachers to the programs scope and sequence. It will provide hands on experience and ensure a best practice implementation of the software for all our ELL learners. We will analyze the data driven reports to better individualize instruction and small group learning. * The Early Reading Matters Agency will work with all teachers of PS 121,inclusive of the ENL Teachers, to develop and strengthen our approach to differentiated instruction. Teachers will be coached to use language development techniques as well as, the use of TPR when lesson planning and conferencing with students in their guided reading groups. Teachers will also be trained on how to more effectively use Making Meaning, a program designed to develop language in students and to develop conversational techniques. These teachers will work collaboratively in planning more effective lessons during small group instruction time during the ENL after school session. The Literacy Consultant will meet with teachers to: * discuss goals and objectives * ELA Curriculum planning and performance tasks 2018-19 CEP 53  Part C: Professional Development * Running records and conferencing * Fountas and Pinnel (assessment tool) and individualized reading * How to use questioning to develop higher order thinking skills * Curriculum mapping, writing units of study and oral language development will also be ongoing topics as they are a school wide focus. During the year we will have inter-visitations of classrooms for teacher to observe other pedagogues and discuss best practices. Extended Monday afternoons (bi-weekly)starting 10/1/2018-6/10/2019 A study group including the ENL Teachers and the cooperating teachers whose classrooms contain ELL Learners will be presented with research in second language learning, using materials that were distributed at regional professional developments. Also, professional texts and journal articles will be reviewed and discussed to help our team keep abreast on current issues and findings. Curriculum mapping, writing units of study, oral language development will also be topics of discussion as they are a school wide focus. All of these strategies will assist our second language learners. Instruction is differentiated according to the ENL child's level and allows each child to excel at their own pace. Also on November 8th Professional Development will take place. Teachers, inclusive of ENL teachers, will participate in a full day of training by our Literacy and Math Consultants to address the following: *Developing and strengthening oral language * Building Academic Vocabulary in both Reading and Math * Rigorous Questioning to deepen comprehension * Scaffolding strategies to enhance and support the ELA curriculum to better address the needs of the ELLs. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent involvement will be encouraged through monthly meetings that will address the needs of the ENL population that is specific to P.S.121. The monthly meetings are as follows: September- discuss assessments: LABs, New York State English as a Second Language Achievement, State English Language Arts , Science and Math Test., which all ENL children are mandated to take (except those exempted from the English language arts if new to the New York City school system). Testing modifications will be discussed where applicable. October - parents will be invited in to observe their child’s class and discuss observations. Volunteer Training Workshop for any ENL Parent that would like to participate/help in their child's classroom or school. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities November - ENL parents will be invited to participate in their child’s instruction. A follow up question and answer period will ensure that parents agree with their child’s placement and develop a home/school partnership. Also discussed will be the different at home strategies that can be used to help their child strengthen their skills. Workshops will address developing reading skills, Math Games and for the upper grade children the middle school process. December - Parents will be invited to share a display of the students’ writing genre whereby each child produces a piece of writing about their own families traditions and customs. This will be a celebration of our English as a New Language students and each child will present their writing orally. Embracing each others differences our goal is to help our ENL population become more like a "School Family." Workshops will also address the explanation of progress reports and filling out middle school applications. January - Each parent will meet with the ENL teacher, classroom teacher and administration to discuss their child’s progress, the method of delivery and adjustments that will be made for the rest of the school year. Workshops will also address the writing process and English language arts and New York State English as a Second language Achievement test prep. February- Workshops will address SES Services, Valentine Reading Workshop and Math Test Prep. March - Parent’s meeting will align with the Parent’s Association meeting where the ENL teachers will join the Literacy Support Team and present the first series of Literacy Development Workshops focusing on Oral Language Development. As well as, a Parent Survey information Session. April- The second series of Literacy Development Workshops will be presented. The topic will be Listening and Speaking. A workshop will also be given on Science Test Prep for upper grade ENL students. Family Fun Fitness Workshop- April and May May- The topic of the Parent’s Meeting will be Writing. Focusing on translating the Listening and Speaking aspect of the Standards into Writing that will reflect the student’s own voice. June- The parents will meet to discuss the results of the Assessments and their child’s placement for next year. At P.S 121 we have an open door policy all parents of English as a New Language students are welcomed to come in and speak with Administration, teachers and our Parent Coordinator. Additional meetings and workshops are planned according to the needs/concerns being expressed by our parents. Spanish speaking Translators are on staff and always available when needed. A teacher on staff translates any notices ,in Spanish, to inform parents of workshops and any type of communication needed between teacher and parent. We inform parents of the very helpful DOE website which provides information about English as a Second Language in many different languages as well as, the workshops that are offered through DOE for ELL Parents. The website is also used by the ENL teachers and those teachers working with the ENL learners when translation is needed in another language other than Spanish. The Translation and Interpretation Unit is also of assistance when a parent of another language, other than Spanish, is needed when important information or correspondence needs to be discussed or addressed. A Parent meeting scheduled in late November the Consultants will work with the parents, inclusive of ENLs, addressing Math and Literacy needs to help keep the parent informed and participate in their child’s success. Explain how to set quantity practice targets, monitor and reward to ensure that the ENL student adopts the independent reading routines to obtain academic success . Assist ENL parents in how to adopt successful home support routines, through the use of comprehension questions, games, phonics and sight word lists, to enhance their child’s reading. They will explain the use of continued assessment tools and differentiation provided to ENL students. Parents will be given the necessary information to monitor, support and improve their child’s reading. Further explain the collection of data of the student’s 2018-19 CEP 55 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities independent reading level, amount of time reading in school and at home with family support improves each child’s overall independent reading level based on assessments, skills cards, quizzes and test scores. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name The Throop School Borough Bronx School Number 121 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Gloria Martinez Coach Ms. Nina Mesopotanese ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Dominique Massaro Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Claudine Mazzarona/IEP Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Brianne Curley 1st Gr. Related-Service Provider Ms. Elmore ENL Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Ms. Yehonela Ortiz Coach type here School Counselor Mr. Penton Parent Sanesha Falconer Parent Coordinator Ms. Ramona Brunson Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 57  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 963 Total number of ELLs 67 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.96% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Lang. na na na na na na Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Assessment tools are as follows: *ECAM *Teacher Created writing assessment) *Inquiry Study *Math Units of Study (culminating tasks) *Writing diagnostic & summative * NYC Performance ELA and Math Assessments(3-5) *NYC ELL Baseline Assessments *Orton-Gillingham (Kindergarten) *Fountas & Pinnell These assessments help us to measure the effectiveness of our instruction as well as providing the ENL teachers to make any needed changes to their lessons and teaching in order to provide the necessary feedback to support the success of our students. These lessons will be differentiated and scaffolds will be used based on the data to ensure all ENLs are capable of 2018-19 CEP 58  understanding the concepts and ideas within their classroom. On going running record assessments in Fountas & Pinnel in reading allow for flexible grouping as the child progresses. This will help us to provide supplemental literacy intervention to provide small group instruction for the struggling students. Math culminating tasks and exemplars provide both drill and exploration for children as well as providing ENL teachers the needed data to identify gaps between CCLS and what are ENL children are able to produce. Classroom and ENL teachers are given opportunities to collaborate during common planning time to discuss the ENL population ,review data and plan more data-driven, rigorous instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our Inquiry Study is needs based and ongoing throughout the year. There is a facilitator on each grade who meets the teachers to collect and review data from the assessments to see the areas of strengths/weaknesses. Lessons are planned and instruction is differentiated to meet those needs. This team is made up of Administration, Facilitators, Coaches, ENL Teachers and Classroom Teachers. Collaboration between ENL teachers and Classroom teachers takes place biweekly during common prep time. This collaboration and data drives instructional planning, addresses specific subgroups where assessments show areas of weakness. Our goal is to improve scores that are low as well as meet grade level requirements. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ELLs through our meetings where we discuss our ELL children Annual Yearly Progressions. These progressions are based on assessments such as: NYSESLAT, NYC Performance Assessments, NYS Math and ELA. As well as, Teacher observation, informal and interim assessments,Fountas and Pinnell running records and assessments, Inquiry Study, culminating tasks, diagnostic and summative reports. Progress is measured using the assessments and running records to determine the child's reading level, fluency rate, stamina , decoding skills and comprehension. Running records are done on a bi-weekly to monthly basis to measure the students progress and needs. Reading groups are flexible throughout the year to address all reading needs. NYC Performance tasks provide us both a baseline as well as pinpoint areas of weakness to drive our planning. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once Teachers analyze data in teacher teams and common planning time this data is then used to inform further instructional plans. This data drives our units/lessons in our curriculum map planning along with creating an intervention plan for the ENL children. The Title III Program will support some ENL children in their areas of need. Some ENL children will also receive provided support from AIS and Literacy teachers. Also small group instruction is provided by the ENL teacher/classroom teacher in the classroom to target a specific area of need. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] After determining that a child is an ELL student through the informal interview and HLIS survey these children are then administered the NYSITELL exam to determine their English language proficiency. All ENLs receive linguistic support as part of their core instructional program in Tier I. Students are taught grade level content according to the Common Core Standards. The ENL Teacher pushes into each grade that houses the ELL learners. The ENL teacher works in collaboration with the classroom teacher planning rigorous, tiered and differentiated lessons to meet the needs of the learners. Children are monitored and assessed to see if they are making the appropriate strides and achievements necessary. (Pearson assessment, classroom observations, running records, diagnostic assessment, teacher observation,culminating tasks) Those children who are displaying difficulty with specific content or skills and are not yet meeting standards are placed in Tier II instruction. Lessons/Activities are planned, tiered and differentiated to meet specific skills to reinforce the standard based curriculum. Extra attention is given to these children in smaller group settings working on specific needs based instruction in conjunction with core instruction. This remediation is done usually within a 6 to 8 week period and progress is constantly monitored through observational notes of the classroom and ENL teachers, informal and formal assessments and diagnostics. If after this time expected gains are still not meet the ENL child is then placed in Tier III where intense and individualized instruction is planned for the specific needs of the child in small group and 1:1 (pull out) or within the classroom(push in).These children are closely monitored and assessed. If a student is still displaying difficulties and challenges 2018-19 CEP 59  over a substantial amount of time the School Based Support Team will then start the process to conduct a comprehensive and multidisciplinary evaluation to help determine the possibility of special education services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Overall through the NYSESLAT and other state tests we have seen progress of all our children inclusive of ENL students. Annually most children have advanced in the levels (scores) with at least 1-4% of children reaching their level of proficiency in the NYSESLAT each year. Using the data from the NYSESLAT we continue to plan lessons focusing on the specific needs of each child incorporating Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing, to further reinforce and review the necessary skills needed so they may reach a proficient level in all subject areas. Through this data we do see that children are reaching proficiency faster in the areas of Listening and Speaking. In the areas of Reading and Writing there has been advancement at a more gradual pace. According to the data of the NYSITELL we see the need for the Entering and Emerging levels to build vocabulary and phonics skills. As well as oral language development. Transitioning and Expanding Levels work in these areas along with building stamina,fluency and comprehension. As children advance through grades they are performing better in their reading. The data pattern does reveal a very minimal progression in writing, in order to progress our children's writing skills we will be incorporating short responses 3-4 x a week and create student friendly rubrics across content areas. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have scheduled ENL related PD as well as Data related PD to discuss findings(test results, years of service, progressions) of ENLs with all staff. The ENL Teacher will turnkey all information from attending the EDAT training to all staff members as well. The EDAT report is used for programming students for integrated ENL services in specific subject areas. As a team, data is analyzed to ensure that appropriate and rigorous lessons are being planned along with fostering programs to ensure that the needs of our ENL children are being addressed. Title III, AIS and Literacy Intervention will be used to support these such needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS 121 is using a both a push-in (K-2) and pull-out (3-5) model. Push-in the children are heterogeneously grouped within 1 classroom. The pull-out children will be grouped homogeneously across grades 3-5 addressing the specific area/skills of need. Our ENL students in Grades K-5 at the Entering/Emerging levels receive 360 minutes Of ENL instruction a week. As per CR Part 154 , one unit of ENL along with 1 unit of ENL/ELA. The ENL Transitioning/Expanding levels receive 180 minutes a week per CR Part 154. Teachers schedules are aligned in order to meet the mandated minutes and all information is programmed into STARS. The ENL teacher will work in collaboration with the classroom teacher addressing the needs of the ENL children. Lessons will be planned and differentiated while incorporating the four modalities of Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing. To strengthen our ELL children’s skills we scaffold instruction, use real life experiences to help build upon higher order thinking, build background knowledge to make connections when new concepts and lessons are introduced. Students will be given the opportunity to reflect and share their learning and experiences. The teachers will be promoting language acquisition through balanced literacy with an emphasis of Language Experience with entering and emerging students. Transitional and Expanding students will receive Balanced Literacy instruction enhanced by a listening, speaking, reading and writing connection. These teachers will use themes that will build background knowledge of students and provide them with an arena for discussion. All students will engage in shared reading and oral presentations. There is a strong focus on Language Development, literacy and writing. The atmosphere of the groups 2018-19 CEP 60  is collaborative and the students are able to share their rich heritage, language and traditions. Materials used to teach that reinforce and strengthen skills are as follows: Fountas and Pinnel, Math Units of Study, Learning Resources, Themed Readers, Language Patterns and Vocabulary, Big Book Chants, Imagine Learning (computer program), Mantra Lingua, Everyday Learning Fun and Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL push in/ pull out services will be provided in accordance with the mandated ENL allotted time based on student proficiency level. As per CR Part 154 Students at Entering/Emerging levels will receive 360 minutes of instruction( 1 unit ENL and 1 unit ELA) . Small flexible grouping will also be needs/data based. The children at Transitioning/Expanding levels will receive 180 minutes of instruction in both ELA and ENL. These push in services are provided by a licensed and certified ENL teacher along with classroom teachers who use ENL strategies and techniques. This instruction for all groups takes place on a daily basis within the classroom (K-2) and in small pull out groups(3-5). The certified and licensed ENL teacher pushes or pulls out in for 1 to 2 periods a day (or a period ½) and differentiates instruction accordingly. The children with very limited English will also be pulled out a period to work in small groups to practice the English Language and strengthen their vocabulary. The ENL teacher and classroom teacher work and plan collaboratively to both address the needs and promote the strengths of the children. We will also continue to support English language acquisition through the implementation of a balanced literacy program with an emphasis on language experiences given to students who perform at a beginning and intermediate English proficiency level. All ENL students are programmed into STARS according to CR Part 154 Regulations. STARS is updated on a regular basis for newly admitted and discharged students. The monthly report, EDUR, is reviewed to help ensure our programming is being entered correctly. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL children are grouped heterogeneously within their grade. As per CR Part 154 our K-5 ENL students from all proficiency levels inclusively receive integrated ENL services. The ENL teacher pushes into grades K-2 and pull ot grades 3-5. She works collaboratively with the classroom teacher in the areas of reading, writing math and science. Children also receive Social Studies and Computer Technology through Common Branch Teachers who use and practice ENL techniques, strategies and methodology. Rigorous lessons aligning to the Common Core Standards are planned (in English) incorporating visuals (pictures/charts), hands on experiments and the use of manipulatives. These lessons are planned with both a learning and language objective to make content more accessible to the ENL population. Children are actively involved in their learning (TPR) and content is made comprehensible to enrich their language development in all subject areas. All students inclusive of ENLs use our school wide curriculum in Reading and Math. Balanced Literacy includes phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency and vocabulary, comprehension through guided, shared and independent reading. Eliciting their ideas and knowledge through the use of graphic organizers, questioning, oral and written summaries. Differentiated instruction is provided through flexible grouping within the classroom. As well as, through the use of the daily small group instruction especially to the newcomers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ENLs who meet the criteria are first tested using the NYSITELL within 5days of their registration date. Those children who are Spanish speaking and fall below the cut score are then tested using the Spanish LAB to determine language proficiency. State tests ( Math, and Science) are ordered in the child’s native language when needed to ensure that they are being appropriately evaluated. 2018-19 CEP 61  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently we do not have any SIFE children however the plan in place is as follows: If in the case, we will examine attendance records to see if a child started in a NYC Public School, returned to their native country and returned back into the NYC school system. This would possibly indicate an interruption in their formal education. PS 121 will make an initial SIFE determination within 30 days of the child's enrollment by doing the following: • Administer the oral interview questionnaire. For children who have a home language of Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Haitian Creole or Spanish they will be administered the LENS evaluation • Prioritize students’ needs. The students will be in a mainstream class served by the ENL teacher on a push in/pull-out basis. They will receive additional interventions from the reading and math coaches. Guidance will also be made available to the SIFE student and their family to aid in making a smooth transition. The initial SIFE status will be identified in ATS(BNDC) b. ENLs in US school less than 3 years: LAB-R results will determine the services offered. Parent meetings will be offered to familiarize families to programs and community. Parent workshops are also provided to help parents get familiar with and learn about the curriculum, so they may take an active part in their child’s learning. The full range of assessment will be administered to monitor progress through the stages and on- going language experience lessons will be offered in the classroom. Parents will be invited to the after school program to work with the teacher and students to further acclimate themselves to the NYC school system. We would also offer: Buddy Pairing, Extended Day Program, Open School Night and Guidance when necessary. c. ENLs receiving services 4 to 6 years: Analyze data of all NYSESLAT, interim assessments, test scores and class work to determine specific area(s) of needs. Work in collaboration with the classroom teacher to continually plan according to the needs of the child. An informal assessment conducted by the SBST to see if any recommendations can be made or other interventions suggested. We would also offer: Extended Day Program, Continued ENL Push-in/small group/differentiated instruction, Peer tutoring, Technology Programs, Keeping open communication with parent and Guidance when needed. d. Long Term ENLs (6 years +): Determine whether the child’s need is language based or developmental. We will then use a full range of assessments to determine the need for the AIS services. The SBST will also informally observe to make any recommendations. We will also offer the mentioned above. e. As per CR Part 154, former ENL students will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL services for the following two years, after testing at the Commanding level. These children will also be given all ENL testing accommodations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The materials used are standard based in both content areas of literacy and math. Our balanced literacy instruction incorporates themed and leveled readers that allow children to make connections to their everyday lives as well as provide pattern and repetition to better reinforce sight words, vocabulary and comprehension. The ENL-SWDs are taught in small groups and 1:1 to better address their individual needs while providing them with the opportunity to listen and converse about different genres of literature with their peers. Some modifications in place are as follows: re-teaching, preview of academic vocabulary, driving questions to add support, technology(Imagine Learning, Gigi) Our Math program allows all children to explore with the use of manipulative and educational games that interest and keep them actively involved in their learning using the TPR technique. Through the help of an AUSSIE Consultant our lessons are being tiered to differentiate instruction to better address the ENL-SWDs needs. If in the case an ELL -SWDs whose IEP mandates Bilingual Instruction, an alternate placement para professional is made available. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP 62  Using the push in model to our ENL-SWDs allows them the opportunity to work and learn in the comfortable atmosphere of their classroom. They work together with their peers in small groups to address their needs in all content areas. Mainstreaming and buddy program is used when appropriate. Groups are leveled and instruction is differentiated according to specific skills. The classroom teacher, ENL teacher, Speech and Occupational Therapist organize their schedules to provide each child with the most effective learning experience. Flexible grouping takes place in both Reading and Math, which allows for increased engagement, high expectations and on going counseling and mentoring. Parental involvement is always encouraged and appreciated. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our support services are provided to the ENLs in reading/writing and math intervention. The Reading/Writing Intervention teacher uses Fountas & Pinnel assessment tools to assess students, target weak areas and build upon areas of strength. This tool is a standard based assessment which pinpoints a child’s weak areas, diagnostic/foramtive/summative writing tasks are used as a writing assessment in conjunction with summative and diagnostic exemplars, Fountas and Pinnell addresses phonics and Running Records are used as an ongoing assessment tool. This data will also be used when planning and working with our children enrolled in the Title III Immigrant Grant program after school. Also Orton-Gillingham data reports. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers will meet on going to discuss data, observations and student work to scaffold lessons in order to support and meet the students' specific needs. The Math Intervention Teacher follows the math pacing calendar aligned to the Common Core to asses’ students and uses item analysis to address needs, Georgia Math end of unit tests, ECAM (K-2) and Guide Posts (K). NYC Performance ELA and Math Assessments (3-5). These interventions are offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? • This year we have incorporated Mantra Lingua. A leveled library of literature in our main languages of Spanish, Arabic and Urdu. It is a computerized pen/microphone that translates the book into a child's native language and English. Children can also record and listen to themselves as they build their oral language, stamina and fluency in reading in English. Our academic goal is to provide support while enhancing fluency, vocabulary and comprehension skills. Using data from the Fountas and Pinnell benchmarks and Leveled Literacy Intervention the teacher will target the needs of the students and work in small groups to address those specific needs in “book talks.” Children will be given the opportunity to critically and creatively think and express themselves while learning and working cooperatively in a comfortable and relaxed environment where it is encouraged to learn from our mistakes. • We will be purchasing_60__ licenses in the Imagine Learning Computer Program. These licenses will be used by our immigrant and ELL students in grades K-5. Imagine learning is a fun interactive learning experience that provides strategic first language support that enhances learning. This program allows the children an opportunity to speak, listen, read and write all supporting the English language through the translations provided in 12 native languages. It provides scaffold lessons that introduce, review and reinforce vocabulary and comprehension. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ENLs are heterogeneously mainstreamed into the classroom where they are eligible for all school programs available. We offer an after school program for all children inclusive of ENLs. There will be 1 teacher holding an ESL license accompanied by fellow teachers who use ENL practices and strategies. This program will assist students with the enhancement of their literacy skills, strengthen their writing skill and work on test taking skills to better prepare them for the NYSESLAT and other state tests. The Title III funding is for our After School Program. Our ENLs fully participate and have access to all school programs such as Band, Chess and Ballroom Dancing, As well as, the After School Program that is offered 2018-19 CEP 63  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our literacy curriculum supports the development of our students’, inclusive of the English Language Learners’ academic language. In the classrooms, the students are immersed in print rich environments. The classroom libraries are well equipped with a variety of trade books that are organized by genres and levels. The students are made aware of their independent reading levels. They are given the opportunity to read independently or engage in book talks within groups or during whole class discussions. Each classroom teacher meets with two scheduled groups of students daily to guide them in their application of effective reading strategies. (Through Fountas and Pinnel children are taught using their instructional level). A risk free environment is promoted, which encourages our students to share their learning and to clarify their misconceptions. The ENL children at the Entering, Emerging and Transitioning and Emerging levels will work on programs from Learning Resources. These programs work on learning phonics and language patterns through listening, speaking, reading and writing. Through big books, posters and poetry it engages children in conversations about specific scenes and encourages them to communicate among themselves while the teacher serves as a facilitator. Also while teaching and reinforcing vocabulary using predictable, basic language patterns. Theme-based readers and activities are used to promote essential literacy skills in all levels. Grammar skills will also be incorporated to aid in all ELL children’s writing. These programs align with the state standards as well as preparation for the NYSESLAT exam. Imagine Learning is accessible to all ENLs and Smart Board Technology will also be incorporated into their learning. We will be purchasing 60 licenses in the Imagine Learning Computer Program. These licenses will be used by our immigrant and ELL students in grades K-5. Imagine learning is a fun interactive learning experience that provides strategic first language support that enhances learning. This program allows the children an opportunity to speak, listen, read and write all supporting the English language through the translations provided in 12 native languages. It provides scaffold lessons that introduce, review and reinforce vocabulary and comprehension. Smart Boards are in place in every classroom. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language Support will be delivered in our ENL Program through dictionaries, charts and pictures that feature translations in the different languages to develop vocabulary, to help associate words with object and to build oral language skills. Learning Resources, Mantra Lingua and Everyday Learning Fun are programs used to build and strengthen vocabulary and reading. Content area state tests will be ordered in child’s native language when necessary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Yes, required services support and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. Programs, curriculum and lessons are planned specifically to the needs and levels of the child. Technology programs used are age appropriate, comprehensible and leveled accordingly to address the skills to be taught and reinforced. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At this point our Parent Coordinator hosts a Welcome Night at the beginning of the school year for grades K-5. Our Parent Coordinator also hosts a parent orientation for incoming Kindergarten students inclusive of our ENLs. Curriculum, expectations and procedures are reviewed to support a smooth transition. Parents can discuss concerns, ask questions and get better acclimated to our school and staff. Spanish translators are available in house and when needed the Translation and Interpretation Unit is used. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives offered at PS 121. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 CEP 64  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development and Support for School Staff To ensure that ENL students receive adequate instruction in order to acquire English proficiency, 2 certified ENL teachers have been appointed to provide ENL services at PS 121 to all staff working with ENL children. The development of the teachers involved in the collaborative structure established to achieve the goals set for the ELL students is also considered as a factor that may influence our success. Therefore the ESL teachers along with the team of teachers they work with receive training to further develop their understanding of the ENL methodologies.( Ms. Massaro and Ms. Elmore (ENL Teachers) along with Ms. Berisha (k), Ms. Cohen(1), Ms. Annunziata (2), Ms. McCourt(3), Ms. Blake (4) and Mr. Villani (5) Throughout the year we will attend workshops and presentations within our district and DOE to keep abreast on research and strategies to better meet our ENLs. Professional Development for all ENL personnel at our school will be on going throughout the year on Monday and Tuesday afternoons and some "Lunch and Learns." Some topics that will be covered are as follows: * Promoting Oral Language/Language Experience (Fall 2017) *Aligning the Curriculum for our ENLs ( Ongoing ) * Using Technology to Support our ENLs (Imagine Learning) ( Fall 2017) * Writing Effective Language Objectives ( On going) * Content Specific Precise Language ( Ongoing) * Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT Spring 2018 Attendance, sign-in sheets and logs are kept on file and reviewed by administration. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional Development and Support for School Staff: All staff members paraprofessionals, special education teachers, psychologists, secretaries and parent coordinators will participate in a full day of training to help strengthen the core literacy instruction school wide. Teachers will be coached to use language development techniques when conferencing with students in Literacy. Coaches will provide professional development to teachers in using let's Talk About It, a program designed to develop language in students to further develop conversational techniques. 2018-19 CEP 65  As an outgrowth of our school inquiry, all teachers will be trained during common planning time to demonstrate how to use questioning to focus on higher order thinking skills. Attendance for all teachers attending workshops, PDs, courses or certificate programs are kept on file(sign in sheets/agendas) and logged in by teachers in attendance and administration. Teachers will attend district wide and DOE PDs in regards to ELLs. Teachers will attend in house professional development where an array of topics will be presented in working with our ELL children. Topic: Checks for Understanding/Student Engagement Time: Common Planning Time across grade levels Mid-September Name of Provider: Ms. Martinez, Ms. Ortiz & Ms. Gonzalez Audience: Teachers of PS121 including Ms. Cohen, Ms. Annunziata, Ms.Blake, Ms. Berisha, Ms. Elmore and Ms. Massaro Topic: Questions and Discussions(ENLS actively participating in discussions) Common Planning Time across grade levels September- on going throughout school year Name of Provider: Ms. Ortiz, Ms. Elmore & Ms. Massaro Audience: Teachers of PS121 including Ms. Cohen, Ms. Annunziata, Ms. Berisha, Ms. Blake, Topic: Content Specific Precise Language(exposing, reinforcing, practicing the use of academic language in both Math and Reading)) Common Planning Time across grade levels October/November Name of Provider: Ms. Ortiz & Ms. Gonzalez Audience: Teachers of PS121 including Ms. Cohen, Ms. Elmore, Ms. Annunziata, Ms. Berisha, Ms. Blake and Ms. Massaro Topic: Language Experience Model in Science and Social Studies Common Planning Time across grade levels November/December Name of Provider: Ms. Ortiz Audience: Teachers of PS121 including Ms. Curley, Ms. Annunziata, Ms.Blake, Ms. Villani, Ms. Berisha and Ms. Massaro Topic:Writing Language Objectives across the content Areas On going throughout school year starting in September Name of Provider: Ms. Ortiz,Ms. Elmore, Ms.Massaro Audience: Staff of PS 121 Individual Teachers will also be sent to workshops in areas that will benefit all children inclusive of our immigrant and ENLs. These teachers will then turnkey this information to other teachers on the grade or across the grades to provide the building blocks necessary to support and strengthen the needs of our learners. Monthly meetings will also be in place to discuss ELL related topics (data, progress, PDs) Topic: EDAT Training (ELL Data Analysis Tool) Audience: Ms. Massaro and Ms. Elmore This information will be disseminated through Common Planning Time Topic: Language Progressions (offered in District) and ELL Monthly Liasons Meeting Name of Provider: Dr. DiTillio Audience: Ms. Massaro and Ms. Elmore 2018-19 CEP 66  Information will be disseminated to Teachers of ELLs through Common Planning Time Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At PS 121 we have an open door policy where parents are encouraged to call or meet whenever there is a concern or issue. One to one meetings are set annually in person to the parent's convenience or phone call to discuss child's progression, development, assessment results and goals. The Classroom teacher along with the ENL Teacher and any other important Teacher/staff keep the parent abreast on their child's levels and progression and encourage a "Team effort" to enable further progression in all content areas. When needed we have Spanish speaking translators available and will provide translation services in other languages when needed through the Translation and Interpretation unit. At the start of every school year the parent is made aware of child's NYSESLAT level and the continued services he/she will be receiving through the year. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our Parent Coordinator hosts a Welcome Meeting for all parents inclusive of ENLs. This meeting and other meetings held will help families get acclimated to programs and resources within the community. A Back to School Night orientation, workshops and other activities, such as these, are also set up to familiarize all families with the school and community. *September: Meeting will be devoted to discuss assessments: NYSESLAT, State ELA and Math Test * October: Parents will be invited to observe in their child’s class and discuss observations. ENL Parents will be invited to in September/October to an orientation meeting to discuss program requirements, state standards, assessments, reason for identification, and level of English proficiency, methods of instruction and how the program will better assist the child, as well as, other pertinent information. *November: ENL Parents will be invited to participate in their child’s ENL instruction. A follow up question and answer period will ensure that their parents agree with their child’s placement and develop a home/school partnership. *December: Parents will be invited to share a display of the students’ writing genre whereby each child produces a piece of writing and present it orally. *January/February: Parents will meet with the ENL teacher, classroom teacher and administration to discuss their child’s progress, the method of delivery and adjustments that will be made for the school year. *March: Parent’s Meeting will align with the Parent’s Association Meeting hosting the first series of the Literacy Development Workshops focusing on Oral Language Development. *April: The second series of the Literacy Development Workshop focusing on Listening and Speaking. *May: Workshop focusing on Writing, translating the Listening and speaking aspect of the standards into writing that will reflect the students’ own voice. *June: Parents will meet to discuss the results of assessments and their child’s placement for the next year. At PS 121 we have an open door policy where all parents inclusive of ENLs are welcomed to come in and speak with administrators, teachers and Parent Coordinator. We are here to address any questions, needs and concerns our parents may have. Parents’ needs are continually evaluated through parent surveys, meetings and conversations. Our Parent Coordinator is both helpful and informative. Translators are on staff and available when needed (Spanish speaking). Letters, memos and literature relating to school issues are translated as well as needed. Our local Public Library also offers Adult ENL classes which are recommended to parents who express interest. 2018-19 CEP 67  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 CEP 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Gloria Martinez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 121 School DBN: 11x121 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Gloria Martinez Title Principal Ms. Yehonela Ortiz & Ms. Melis Assistant Principal Ms. Ramona Brunson Parent Coordinator Ms Dominique Massaro & Ms. Mir ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Sanesha Falconer Parent Ms. Brianne Curley/ AIS Teacher/Subject Area Ms.Claudine Mazzarona/IEP Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Nina Mesopotansese Coach Coach Mr. Penton School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X121 School Name: PS121 Superintendent: Meisha Ross Porter The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Andaluz- Scher Maria Data Specialist Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to ensure all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in their preferred language PS 121 has taken several steps to do so: When parents first arrive to PS 121's main office they are welcomed by the multilingual Welcome Poster and language identification guide to make parents aware of the availability of language services offered to them. This ensures us to determine the needs of our parents within 30 days of a student's enrollment allowing to arrange/manage any translation and interpretation needs they may have throughout the year. A review of the HLIS,RAPL and UPPG in ATS by the ENL teacher in conjunction with the Parent Coordinator and Pupil Personnel Secretary, allows us to further identify and confirm which languages were read and written at home. An informal interview of the students, by the ENL teacher, will further clarify the language needs in the home. Lastly a discussion between the classroom teacher, ENL Teacher and Parent Coordinator will share the language needs of the parents with whom they need to communicate. Steps in the process: a. Looked at list of eligible ENL students to see what languages they speak (RHLA) (RELL) 2018-19 CEP 71  b. Looked at HLIS, RAPL and UPPG(ATS) of new students c. The Language ID Guide is provided so a parent can indicate the language they speak d. Asked Parent Coordinator for input e. Survey classroom teachers f. Confirm with parents what their language of preference is at our ENL orientation meeting. Document language(ATS) and share with the appropriate staff g. Preferred language for communication is listed on the emergency cards. h. The main language needed is Spanish. Staff is in house and available for the parents needs(registrations, meetings, workshops, IEP meetings) However, when we do not have a translator available on site we have utilized the DOE language line services via telephone. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali French Mossi English Pilipino Punjabi Spanish TWI Urdu Vietnamese Wolof 14 10 1 1 1123 1 1 66 0 16 1 1 1.13 0.81 0.08 0.08 90.93 0.08 0.08 5.34 0 1.3 0.08 0.08 13 9 1 1 1120 1 1 70 1 16 1 1 1.05 0.73 0.08 0.08 90.69 0.08 0.08 5.67 1.3 1.3 0.08 0.08 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A 2018-19 CEP 72  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families IEP Meetings 09/17 - 06/18 Parent Handbook 09/07/17 DOE letters 09/17 - 06/18 School Letters, Fliers 09/17 - 06/18 (ex. Title 1, Title III before/after school programs, parent workshops) How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The School Based Support Team contacts the DOE Language Line to arrange for a translator via telephone. We have also contracted outside vendors for translation services. The Parent Coordinator will send it to the DOE translation unit via "Translation Request Forms" and have it translated into Arabic, Bengali, Spanish, and Urdu. The school aides and Parent Coordinator have a list of students (name, language, class) with their parent's preferred language. When we receive translated DOE correspondence they make copies for these students and distribute the translated versions. Currently we have Spanish versions of most school letters. However, we will submit requests to the DOE translation unit in order to have these letters translated into Arabic, Bengali, Spanish, and Urdu. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open School Nights 09/13/17 05/23/17 Parent Teacher Conferences November 2017 - Report Cards January 2017 - Progress Report March 2017 - interpretation service(s)? We have several parents, parent volunteers, and staff members who serve as translators. We have several parents who serve as translators. They volunteer to interpret Parent/Teacher meetings. Most of our non-English speaking parents bring English proficient adult relatives to these meetings. However, we do 2018-19 CEP 73  Report Card Teacher Tuesdays 09/17-06/17 (weekly parent engagement workshops, meetings) schedule meetings with the DOE translation service unit to have translators available via telephone. We will distribute the Parent Teacher Conference dates in Spanish, Arabic, Urdu, and Bengali. The DOE has provided these translated versions. We have several parents, parent volunteers, and staff members who serve as translators. If it is a formal parent meeting, teachers can arrange for a translator from the DOE translation unit via telephone. The Parent Coordinator will assist teachers to arrange this service. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. On the emergency card we locate an adult relative that speaks English in order to relay important information. We also have parents, parent volunteers and school staff who act as interpreters in order to relay urgent information. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Ms. Massaro, Language Access Coordinator, and Ms. Brunson, Parent Coordinator will conduct a meeting during the Monday professional development time in September to review the regulations. Copies of the Chancellor's Regulation will be distributed. They will describe how teachers can arrange for translation services and review the system for distributing translated versions of school/DOE correspondence. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 121 provides Spanish translation services for important citywide and school-wide documentation and materials. Spanish speaking staff are available in house at registration, parent meetings and workshops. As well as IEP (Individualize Education Plan) or PPC (Pupil Personnel Committee) meetings. If a language other than Spanish is 2018-19 CEP 74  needed, PS 121 will provide these services from an outside vendor. As well as interpreters available through the DOE Translation and Interpretation unit by phone. Parents will also have access to: • Poster concerning Language Assistance Services will be displayed on parent information bulletin board near entrance of the school. • Copy of Attachment A, of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 will be distributed during the first parent meeting as well as at registration. • A link is provided in the school’s web page directing parents to www.nycenet.edu/Offices/Translation/ContactUs/Default.htmA Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 121 will create a "Parent Satisfaction Survey" which will be distributed twice a school year to gather feedback to determine if the need, availability and quality of translation services have been met in regards to: Program Selection, written and oral communication, child's academic growth and child's goal setting. This survey will be available on line or via backpack to those who do not have access to a computer. Parents will also be invited to use our school computers with assistance if needed. Parents will be provided with training in the use of NYC Schools Account a program where they can view their child's grades, attendance, and student profile. This information will be automatically translated into parent's preferred identified home language. This will keep our parents informed as well as increase School/class/parent/teacher communication. 2018-19 CEP 75 
