2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X138 School Name: P.S. 138 SAMUEL RANDALL Principal: JEANNA DICKERSON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 08X138 (718)239-3114 Fax: Email Address: Powens3@schools.nyc.gov School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Samuel Randall 320800010138 PreK - 5 2060 Lafayette Avenue (718)822-5325 Phone Number: Paulette Owens School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Jeanna A. Dickerson Deborah Martinez Teran Maria Bayron Paulette Owens SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Yasmin Brown and Christopher Speight CBO Representative: Geographical District: 8 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Erika Tobia Superintendent: 1230 Zerega Avenue etobia@schools Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 828 6653 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 7188282760 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 ZeregaAvenue nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7188287776 Phone Number: 7187418895 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name JeannaA. Dickerson Deborah Martinez Teran Maria Byron Carol Bracero YasminBrown Michelle deMattos Angela Baez Geraldine Mitchell Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) DaciroGarcia Diane Munro Morris Paulette Owens Isabel Mendez Sabrina Skeiton Christopher Speight Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ CBO Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The school mission statement states: Section 4: CEP Overview PS 138 Samuel Randall in partnership with its students, families, community, and District 8 will work to ensure each student an enriched education by providing quality instruction and challenging learning experiences in a safe and orderly environment which will foster life long learning and responsible citizenship. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Presently, we have established a relationship with the KIps Bay Boys and Girls Club., a community based organization that provides an afterschool program as well as a summer program for students in the community. Parent workshops are conducted by them on various topics related to mental health and student wellness. Through a 21st century grant, we now have an ASPIRA afterschool program. A parental involvement committee has been established by ASPIRA to include the PA and administration with the task of conducting joint parent/student engagement activities. To further the cultural awareness of our largely Hispanic population, we applied and received two grants, one being CASA and the other Art Education for ENL and SWD students with the provider being Society for Educational Arts (SEA). The school has established a very supportive school culture that positively impacts students' academic and personal development, as evidenced by the reduction in incidents of misconduct, improved attendance and ongoing improvement in students' academic performance . To continue to support an environment where students are safe and supported and challenged to develop critical thinking skills, we have partnered with the Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility. Their program, 4Rs teaches building community, diversity, assertiveness, problem solving and other topics through inclusive and motivating literature. Classroom teachers as well as other stake holders in the school community, such as, school aides, paraprofessionals, cafeteria staff , have been trained in this social and emotional program. Parental workshops have been held in both English and Spanish on the social and emotional wellness of elementary school students.. District 8's initiative of a social and emotional program, RULER, has bee implemented to our staff and administration. The full implementation of RULER school wide will be in the 2018/2019 school year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Presently, PS 138 services English as a New Language students who primarily speak Spanish, with our next two languages being Bengali and Arabic. The range of our ENL students mandate two ENL teachers who provide the mandated instructional periods for each group. Programming is essential to their learning to minimize the out of classroom times during core subjects. Parental involvement is an aspect that we encourage with the ENL Parental Side by Side Learning program. This allows the students to pair up with their parents during ELA and Math lessons. The students with disabilities classifications vary widely within our school community. The classifications include learning disabilities, autism, speech and language impairment, attention deficit disorder and emotional disturbance. There are self contained and ICT classes on each of our grades from K-5. The modification of curriculum while maintaining rigours instruction and high expectations are the key to academic achievement for our students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Using the Framework of Great Schools we continue to build classrooms where students are engaged in real world problem solving skills while feeling safe and confident to explore their thinking. Through our collaboration with our math consultants we have made gains in teacher practice enabling them to provide multiple entry points for student learning. The ELA consultant collaboration has allowed our teachers to deep dive in concepts and plan for more student choice in learning . Our focus for this school year will be to reduce the number of level ones in both ELA and Math. Our 2016-2017 school year data indicates 23% of our students at a level 3 0r 4 and 27% level 3 or 4 in Math. We are committed to increase both percentages by 5%.. 2018-19 CEP 10  2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X138 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 724 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 59 58 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 87.6% % Reduced Lunch 8.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.1% 65.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 60 60 89.1% 1.9% 19.3% 28.7% 2.2% 2.8% 6 6% 10.3 31.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Through the use of our ELA and Math consultants we continue to adopt and adapt curriculum aligned to Common Core. The adapting of the curriculum has allowed for all students to be given the opportunity to be challenged in their classrooms on a daily basis. The continued support of teacher professional learning opportunities has continued to enable teachers to customized lessons, plan for multiple entry points and an active engagement of all students The priority need is in the use of data based goals that we track for progress, are understood and supported by the school community which was indicated in our Quality Review for 2016-2017. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will increase studetn performance for grades 2-5 as evidenced by a 5% increase of the students performing at grade level in ELA and Math as measured by classroom assessments, Iready and Iready standard Mastery. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Students will participate in daily classroom assessments and in technology and researched based programs that give data for teachers to collect on a regular basis as well as specific benchmark collection periods in September, January, April guided reading conferring    KEMS/Engage NY, Envision   Reading A to Z  Recipe for Reading  I-Ready Iready Standard Mastery Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? all Sept- June teachers SY 2018-2019 Instructional Coach Universal Literacy Coach Administration Professional Learning Opportunities of Staff Sept- June  KEMS /Engage NY, Envision  Writing Unit of Study  Balanced Literacy  Data Driven Instruction  Universal Design Learning  Recipe for reading 2018-2019 Generation Ready Consultants Instructional Coach Universal Literacy Coach Administration Bronx Field Support IEP Teacher Students will be part of different teaching techniques: ENL’s, Sept - June teachers ● RTI ● Small group instruction ● one to one instruction Parent workshops What is IReady? What is Independent Reading? at risk and SWD 2018-2019 Coaches parents Sept - June 2018-2019 Administration, Universal Literacy Coach 2018-19 CEP 14  Instructional Coach Generation Ready Coach Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To support parents in our partnership in educating their children, we will conduct educational based workshops , IReady, Independent Reading, and Phonics. These workshops will be conducted during Engagement Tuesdays and Saturdays. ELA point teachers, Universal Literacy Coach and Generation Ready consultants will design and implement them with administration oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School leaders, coaches, Generation Ready and National Teaching Network consultants as well as teachers will be the personnel involved in carrying out the plan. Instructional Resource will include IReady, KEMS/EngageNY Envision Passport, Recipe for Reading Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be 3% increase of students reading at or above grade level as indicated by DRA2 and IReady data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) IReady and ELA benchmark assessments will be the instrument used to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We presently have bullying workshops presented by the School Climate Coordinator and outside partnerships. The guidance counselor provides individual students with support with emotional and behavior issues. The continuation of the 4R program and social emotional professional learning by the Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a decrease of Level 3 student infractions of the NYC Citywide Behavior Expectations by 5% as compared to data from June 2018 according to OORS reporting system 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Life Space Crisis Intervention professional development for 3 staff members to equip staff with strategies to deal with student in behavioral crisis. These 3 staff members will turnkey this training to staff school wide to enable capacity building in all staff. all staff Sept- June 2018-2019 a quarterly pd Morningside Center for Teaching Social and Emotional School wide Sept-June the weekly implementation of a 4R lesson schoolwide on Fridays which deals with communication conflict resolution, diversity and perseverance 2018-2019 weekly Ms. Hargett, Ms. Velez and Ms. Martinez will implement and the administration will have the overseeing of the activity and strategies. School Climate Coordinator Teachers, students and partnership. Administration will have oversight of the fidelity of implementation. RULER by Yale University All Sept-June Staff, 2018-2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will participate in RULER workshop given by PS 138 staff and ASIPRA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff will be the personnel involved in carrying out the plan Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 17  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, evidence of a decrease in level 3 infractions of the NYC Citywide Behavioral Expectations by 3% as compared to February 2018 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Summary report from OORS system Student, parent and staff incident reports will be used to monitor progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to Quality review 2016-2017, PS 138 was proficient in setting high expectations for our students. Teachers plan instruction using curriculum maps, pacing calendars,and collaborative lesson planning . This ensures that all stakeholders know what is needed to be addressed to meet students goals throughout a unit. Modifying the plans by using data to help the students is an area of concern. Consultants have been hired to assist in this process to ensure alignment to the CCLS. Assessment data will provide feedback to students on a consistent basis to also enable timely adjustments to curricula and instruction. An Writing Initiative was developed in alignment to the Chancellor's and Superintendent goals focusing on four genres of writing. Our 2016-2017 school year data states that 23% of our students are at level 3 or 4 in ELA, and 27%of the students at level 3 or 4 in Math. Our 2017-2018 school year data states that 33% of our students are at level 3 or 4 in ELA and 32% of our students are at level3 or 4 in Math. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 teachers will have made modifications to curriculum maps, pacing calendars and lessons plans to reflect data driven instruction evidenced by formal and informal assessments, inquiry teams' findings, baseline, midline and endline benchmarks and Iready standard mastery assessments. The impact of this collaborative teaching will result in a 5% increase in the number of students achieving grade level proficiency in ELA and math. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students will participate ALL Sept-June Schoolbo, guided reading ,  Reading A to Z and Raz Kids    Engage NY, Envision   Passport of Social Studies  Writing Curriculum  Recipe for Reading I Ready 2018-2019 teachers Administration will have oversite of the assessment review Staff will be provide professional learning opportunities on ALL Sept-June  Teacher College Reading Program  ELA Instructional support – Higher Order Thinking Questions- Depth of Knowledge and Hess 2018-2019 weekly Teachers, Administration and Universal Literacy Coach.  Data Driven Instruction  Balanced Literacy Program  Writing Process Instruction 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Various workshops will be provided on Parent engagement Tuesdays and Saturdays by Generation Ready, National Teaching Network Math instructional coach, administration and teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 20  Teacher, coaches, and administration will be the personnel responsible. Programs that will be utilized Reading A to Z ,Schoolbo, Ready Gen., IReady . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 IReady mid year assessment and simulations in ELA and Math as well as I Ready base line assessments will be utilized to monitor progress for this goal from September 2017 to February 2018 with an increase of 3% growth of students performing at grade level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. IReady Math and ELA will be used to monitor progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2016-2017 Quality Review states that were are proficient in the area of teacher support and supervision.School leaders have structures in place to utilize teacher observation data, to design targeted professional development for teachers, and accurately capture teachers’ strengths, challenges, and next steps via feedback using the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Our 2016-2017 school year data states that 23% of our students are at level 3 or 4 in ELA, and 27% of the students at level 3 or 4 in Math. Our 2017-2018 school year data states that 33% of our students are at level 3 or 4 in ELA and 32% are at level3 or 4 in Math. According to the Quality review for 2016-2017 , PS 138 is developing in evaluate the quality of school- level decisions, making adjustments as needed to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school, with particular attention to the CCLS. Teacher will continue to work on the committee that formulates the goals, make decision for Measure of Student Learning and professional learning opportuntites. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 teachers will be able to be rated effective in Advance Domain 3 competencies 3B, 3C and 3D impacting student learning by a 5% increase in grade level proficiency in ELA and math standardized testing.as a result of differentiated professional learning opportunities, timely and effective feedback, observations and inter class visitations. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff will provide workshops during Parent Engagement Tuesdays parents Sept-June teachers  ELA strategies  Writing  Math   RULER by Yale  Science IReady 2018-2019 District 8, Bronx Field Support Teachers, coaches, and administration, Generation Ready, Master Teacher Program online Professional Development on teachers Sept-June  Engage NY, Envision, KEMS  Teacher College Reading Program  ELA Instructional support – Higher Order Thinking Questions- Depth of Knowledge and Hess 2018-2019  Balanced Literacy  Data Driven Instruction  Writing curriculum  Universal Design Learning  ENL Strategies   Writing Quality IEP's  Recipe for Reading SESIS 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Various workshops will be provided on Parent engagement Tuesdays and Saturdays by Generation Ready, National Teaching Network Math instructional coach, administration and teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Coaches, administration, NTN consultant, Generation Ready Consultant and the FSC will be responsible for the professional learning opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019,50% of the teachers will have inter-class visitations to share best practices and one opportunity to turn key on professional learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets and agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parent engagement is constantly a part of our school . Each year we strive to increase our participation of parents in our parent engagement activities. We have seen in one particular event - Bring your Dad's to School day we first year we had 89 men then the second year 120 men and in our third year 149 men. A parent survey was conducted by our Social worker as to what support/workshops they wanted to see conducted. Approximately 120 parents returned the survey with the census that workshops should be on Friday evenings or Saturday morning. The topics ranged from bullying, family counseling, parent/child relationships, ELA and Math help for parents and students and ENL classes for parents. Working with our community resources from Bridge the Gap and Thrive New York we are holding monthly parent engagement activities on Fridays and Saturdays. Working with our teachers, as well as consultants, we have schedule bi monthly ELA and Math workshops where parents can learn side by side with their students including the SWD and ENL. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 a 10% increase in parent participation in workshops as measured by attendance sheets. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents will engage in different parent workshops: parents Sept-June Teachers, coaches, administration  Early childhood ELA strategies  ELA strategies  Engage NY- Math  Science 2018-2019 Parents will engage is social emotional workshops parents Sept- Jan Staff and ASPIRA RULER by Yale University 2018 - 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Various workshops will be provided on Parent engagement Tuesdays and Saturdays by Generation Ready, National Teaching Network Math instructional coach, administration and teachers ASPIRA and KIps Bay will provide parent workshops Staff and parents will work collaboratively in SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff members and CBO's will be used to achieve this goal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, parental engagement and involvement will increase by 5% as measured by attendance sheets and parental feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets, surveys and parent feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are not at grade appropriate reading levels and Level one on State Exam Level one on State Exam 4th grade science test Teacher assessments Students in crisis Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small guided reading groups small group, one to one tutoring, During School and after school Small group math instruction small group, one to one tutoring, During school day and after school small group instruction small group instruction one to one small group small group small group During School day and after school During school day One to one During the day 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 121 students or approximately 15% of our school community 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide support to students in temporary housing that will benefit there social emotional well being. A social worker will work with students in temporary housing. Workshops will be provide to support parents. Students will provide with school supplies as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school will utilize Human Resource to identify qualified teachers when there are vacancies. Provide funding for uncertified teachers to take course and workshops to become highly qualified teachers. Professional development is provided at least two times a week in different subjects and strategies during common preps and 50 minute staff development. The administration and coaches offers afternoon series on the different aspects of an effective ELA program for elementary schools which open to all staff members. Generation Ready developer provides “lunch and learns” to update teachers with best practice techniques in ELA.. All teaching staff will be provided with ongoing training in explicit instruction. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Learning Opportunities is provided in house and through the NYCDOE throughout the school year. These professional covers a wide range of academic subject matters Ready Gen, Danielson Teacher Effectiveness, Explicit Instruction, Engage NY Math, Paraprofessional as Stakeholders, and Strategies for ELL and Student with disabilities Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 31  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Presently PS 138 has a Pre-k program. Parents are encourage to participate in early childhood workshops that are provide by consultants 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Team of teachers along with administrators make decisions about professional development and Measure of Student Learning. This team is picked by the United Federation Teachers chapter leader and the principal. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) Highly qualified teachers Part 2 - 2b Reduce class size Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 818,125.00 Title II, Part A Federal 165,643.00 2018-19 CEP 32  Title III, Part A Federal 11,200.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,628,802.00 x x Part 2 2b Parent/Student sided by side learning After school program 5b part 3a Lower class sizes, Afterschool Program Professional development Part 2-2b Section 4 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 CEP 33   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 138X , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS138X will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State NO Child Left Behind accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 36  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 138 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), Act"is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 37  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA ; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences Nov, March and May during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 38  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent but docotro notes are for explanation only; Students must maintain 90% attendance. ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 CEP 39  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. wear uniform daily 2018-19 CEP 40  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 41  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The rationale behind our ENL After School Program is to develop academic vocabulary for the students so that they are better able to succeed on their science and math tests as well as on the NYSESLAT. We will have an emphasis on writing during the afterschool program as we want our students to be lifelong writers who write for a wide variety of purposes and audiences. To that end, students will be using both Imagine Learning for academic language development and Kidblog to write on a wide variety of topics which they can pick. They will develop narratives, fiction, poetry and scientific reporting during the course of the after school program. This is in response to the shift in thinking which culminate in the Next Generation Learning Standards and Advanced Literacy. The rationale behind our Side-by-Side Learning Saturday Academy is to develop, among whole families, a culture of rich oral language, rich conversations and storytelling. Again, this will be influenced by our professional development in Advanced Literacy. We know that our students struggle most on the NYSESLAT on the listening and writing portions. We want students to write for pleasure as a way of building stamina and to listen to others' stories for pleasure as a way of developing listening skills. The ENL Afterschool will serve students at the Entering through Expanding level in grades 3 through 5. Students in the Side-by-Side Learning Saturday Academy will be in grades K through 2, as well as newcomers, and will attend with their family members. Schedule and duration: Planning will take place in December. The after school program will begin on January 2nd . They will have 28 sessions in total, with a culminating party on the 28th session for students and their families. Students will attend from 2:40 to 4:40 on the following days: January 2nd, 3rd, 9th, 10th, 16th, 17th, 23rd, 24th, 30th and 31st; February 6th, 7th, 13th, 14th, 27th and 28th; March 6th, 7th, 13th, 14th, 20th, 21st, 27th, and 28th; and April 10th, 11th, 17th and 18th. Language of instruction will be English with native language support in Spanish, French and Arabic. Imagine Learning provides students instruction in these languages, gradually decreasing the home language as the student becomes more proficient in English. For ENL After school, there will be two teachers, one a content area teacher with a common branch license and and the other a certified ENL teacher with a TESOL license. Teachers will be providing direct, small group instruction for 22 students (in groups of 11 each). They will learn via station teaching with the teachers switching groups halfway through the period. Types of Materials for Direct Instruction will include Imagine Learning licenses (22 total), headsets, Kidblog, periodicals and paper so that kids can print up their blogs when a topic has been posted for enough time for everyone to write and respond. Other materials include admission to four direct instructional trips that follow the rationale and extend the learning of the program to include parents as well as students. One Saturday trip will be targeted specifically to families and that will be to the Bronx Z00. Parents are also invited to trips to the New York Botanical Garden, the New York Historical Society and the Metropolitan Museum. The school has some Imagine Learning licenses already, but five additional licenses will be purchased with Title III funds. Also, Kidblog will be purchased with Title III funds. The paid version better engages students as they are more fully able to customize their blogs. 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Records will be maintained by teachers including attendance and monthly progress reports. Students with perfect attendance will receive an award for attendance. Parents will receive four reports on student progress printed in the parents' preferred languages as indicated by the HLIS. For the Saturday Academy, there will be two teachers (one a content teacher with a common branch license and the other a certified ENL teacher) and four sessions from 9am to 11:30. Those will occur on April 27th, May 4th, 11th and 18th. Types of Materials for Direct Instruction will include ipads, bilingual books and picture dictionaries. Records will be maintained by the teachers including attendance sheets and a formative assessment of progress and next steps. There will also be a record of the cultural feast with photos documenting the dishes and celebration of the participating parents' cultures. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers to receive training will include the two teachers conducting direct instruction for ENL After school and the two teachers who are conducting direct instruction for the side-by-side ENL for parents on Saturdays. Schedule and Duration: The teachers will meet for an hour and a half on November 7th, 8th, 14th and 15th. The teacher guiding the study sessions will be Ms. Rymer who has attended two PD sessions on the basic concepts entailed, but who also will benefit from deeper study. Records will be maintained via agendas and attendance sheets which will be kept in the filing cabinet in the ENL room. Teachers will complete a "before" and "after" survey to document what they have learned in the sessions. Those will be kept in the ENL Binder as well as being copied for the Principal. Topics to be covered will be (Session 1) the Why and How of Advanced Literacy Instruction, (Session 2) Four Key Shifts for Promoting Advanced Literacy Instruction, (Session 3) the Hallmarks of a Strong Instructional Core, and (Session 4) the two Spotlight Briefs on Units of Study and Language Production Projects. The professional development will be charged to the Title III plan using the prevailing per session rates. Name of provider: ENL Teacher Debra Rymer 2018-19 CEP 43  Part C: Professional Development . Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 2018-19 CEP 44  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Rationale: parents are more likely to attend on a Saturday than on a weekday. Parents will be more likely to attend if part of the component is ENL for adults. Parents are motivated by the possibility of learning and practicing English as a New Language. For the Saturday Academy, there will be two teachers (one a content teacher with a common branch license and the other a certified ENL teacher) and three sessions from 9am to 11:30. Those will occur on April 27th, May 4th, and 11th. Additionally, there will be two teachers for three hours on Saturday, May 18th, taking the participating families on a guided trip to the Bronx Zoo, allowing parents and children to practice those skills in an interest-rich, real-world setting. Topics to be covered in side by side learning: Immigration and community resources, how to read bilingual books with your child, the importance of family conversation, English vocabulary specific to common situations and nourishing our community of many cultures. Parents will also learn English through specific themes. For example, families, fruits and vegetables, etc. Topics to covered in the content area with the children: Narrative writing, phonics, and storytelling. Two teachers, an ENL teacher and a content teacher will conduct sessions with parents learning with their students side by side for the first hour as the two teachers co-teach. Then for the second hour, students will work with the content teacher as the parents practice English conversation for the second hour. During the last half-hour, students and parents come together again to practice what they learned, ask questions, and share insights. Native Language support and translation: One of the two teachers will be Spanish speaking. The ENL teacher will reach out to parent volunteers in the community who speak Bengali, Kmer, Wolof and Arabic. Parents will be notified of these activities via the Fall and Winter ENL Newsletters and also by telephone. They will be invited to attend with a written, mailed invitation. Records of attendance will be kept in the ENL filing cabinet. With permission, we will also document meetings in photographs, so that we can share the parents' experiences with our school. These will be retained on the ENL computer and in the ENL binder. Name of Provider: Ms. Caban and a teacher with a Common Branch license Literacy materials, parent refreshments and admission to the Bronx Zoo will be charged to the Title III plan in keeping with the state limits of 10% of the funds being used for parental engagement. Direct Instruction for students will be charged to the Title III as well under the state's limitations. Additionally, Title III will provide the Administrator hours necessary to open the building on a Saturday so long as no other program is running. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 0 .00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 2018-19 CEP 45  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA  High quality staff 0 .00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 .00 NA NA NA NA 0NA 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 0 .00 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name The Samuel Randall School Borough Bronx School Number 138 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jeanna Dickersron Coach Deneen Davis ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Debra RymerNancy Caban Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Martinez/Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Perritatno.Science Related-Service Provider Paulette Owens Superintendent Dr. Karen Ames Assistant Principal Darlene Stokes Coach Maria Maglaris School Counselor Barbara Godwin Parent Natalie Paulino Parent Coordinator Mildred Jimenez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Lilian Fleshman Whitaker C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 47  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 721 Total number of ELLs 61 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.46% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Lang. n/a n/a na n/a n/a n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Classroom teachers use the DRA, Imagine Learning, iready and teacher-created assessments in order to determine the reading levels of ELLs, the reading habits of ELLs and what areas to target for RTI support. Further, our ENL teachers use teacher created assessments and purchased NYSESLAT preparation books to test students across the modalities. These assessments together with the ELA, NYSESLAT and NYSITELL show that we had an influx of Entering level students, true newcomers, last year. Those students gained in receptive language and reading by the end of the year. For students in the Emerging through Commanding levels, focusing on strategies for short response writing paid off last year as students in grades 3, 4, and 5 were better able to write with structure and add details. Our EDAT indicated that our students on all levels of language acquisition need to work on listening skills, so that will be something we pay extra attention 2018-19 CEP 48  to this year. We will continue to pay attention to the data from DRA and formative assessments as well as practice NYSESLAT activities. Additionally, students on the Emerging through Transitioning levels in Grades 2-5 take part in the Imagine Learning program which provides detailed analysis of student skills and outlined areas of need. This forms our school's instructional plan in that during ENL free-standing and ENL/ELA instruction, one component of literacy analysis will be looking at what parts of speech are doing what, and what functions various phrases are serving in the sentence and paragraph levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? During common preps between the ENL teachers, strategies and materials are reviewed and shared. Teachers additionally coordinate via email and share Ready Gen texts as well as ENL materials. ENL teachers also modify math instruction in order to scaffold when necessary. Further, during common planning with classroom teachers, the ENL teachers plan with those teaching ELLs to target particular areas of need. For each content objective, the ENL teacher creates and shares with the co-teacher a language objective specific to the needs of ELLs. Ms. Davis, our testing coordinator and literacy coach, provides us with the curriculum maps and writing units for each grade level. With her help, the ENL teachers are able to coordinate with classroom teachers during inquiry time after school. Additionally, Title III programs include planning periods for teachers to meet and analyze data in order to create lessons for our ENL after school and Saturday academy. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the EDAT tool to determine how our ELLS have performed as well as other measures of success. The NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, Spanish LAB, DRA assessments, and, when necessary, tests of phonemic awareness form our baseline along with the baseline writing exercise. We evaluate students via DRA and running records as well as practice NYSESLAT testing materials to determine progress. These ongoing assessments as well as accomplishments logged in Imagine Learning reports and examples of student work are all considered in evaluating the success of our ENL program. In addition we use the conferencing notes and classroom observations to guide instruction. Areas of need determined by these summative assessments included oral language and vocabulary development and sentence structure for newcomers. Also identified areas of need were identifying cause and effect, inferencing and using the text as a base for response writing for the students at the Transitioning through Commanding levels. Our EDAT indicates that our ELLS are outperforming non-ELLs in the sense that fewer score at or below 25th growth percentile while scoring level 1 or 2 on ELA and on Math. However, ELLS are more likely to be at risk, in part due to having lower than 90% attendance. Finally, our EDAT indicated that our ELLs need to work on listening skills as that was the modality in which there was the least amount of gain. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our ENL teachers sit on the SIT committee to better communicate the need for academic interventions and to ensure that ELLs with special needs are being represented. Further, the school has an AIS team that conducted Teir 2 intervention and the ELLs who could best benefit from this were part of that program. The AIS team included the ENL teachers and over the course of the year, students from each grade level were serviced. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our ENL teachers use the NYSESLAT test results, DRA tests and teacher-created vocabulary and phonemic awareness tests to prioritize RTI for students who have not progressed at least one grade level over the course of the previous year. Additionally , NYSITELL results are used to indicate students who are true newcomers and who need Tier 3 RTI to maximize language practice. The school will further use DRA results from the previous year to recommend RTI for students who are behind grade level for Tier 2 support within the classrooms. 2018-19 CEP 49  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We began using the Math assessment data more, last year, and based our Title III program on that data and on the NYSESLAT data. We focused on giving students extra time to learn and practice vocabulary from the content areas and our results showed small gains in Math and science for our ELLs. The ELLs that were in our school last year who were registered with us in September included 18 students who went up one or more levels (8 from NYSESLAT to NYSESLAT and 10 from NYSITELL to NYSESLAT). 35 students went up at least a point. One student scored expanding and 3 on ELA, According to EDAT 12 remained at the same proficiency level and 0 regressed. Looking at the EDAT Modalities of Strength report, students most suffered on the listening test. As ELA prep no longer addresses this critical modality, we plan to address listening in our professional development as well as ensuring it is a prominent feature of lesson planning. Another area of concern is that a few of our students had attendance under 90%. This elevated the ELL population in terms of risk as compared to non-ELLs. The largest population of our ELLs (18 students) are at the Expanding level. Twelve students are at the Transitioning level and the rest are Emerging and Entering. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We conduct Professional Development sessions led by our ENL teachers to turnkey training on tools and strategies available to the classroom teachers. Last year, we were able to illustrate the components of the SIOP model for all of our classroom teachers by using video clips and interactive activities. Further, we provided teachers with sample lesson plans, the Freyer model vocabulary graphic organizer and new tools available through technology such as uniteforliteracy.com. We shared which materials which could be used to give students native language support as they learn to read in English. We further modeled and distributed resources for teaching ELLs content area vocabulary. This year we will focus on strategies for effective co-teaching and strategies for teaching listening in the classroom and building oral language as a component of overall literacy. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. For four periods per week, each grade level is served in heterogeneous groups so that all students from EN to CM are served (CM for two of those periods). For four additional periods per week students on the EN and EM level are pulled into small groups to focus on language acquisition appropriate to their specific needs. Students at this level receive 360 minutes per week. Students at the Transitioning and Expanding level receive 180 minutes per week and students at the commanding level receive 90 minutes per week for two years after attaining that proficiency level. Students who are at commanding level or who are in special settings are gathered and push in with the ENL teacher into the 02 classroom. The ENL teacher parallel teaches the same content, but scaffolded for ELLs, during the 2018-19 CEP 50  integrated instructional time with students grouped at one or two tables. During stand-alone time, the teacher works with students in a classroom but doing work that is appropriate for their needs. In rare instances, students are pulled out for Stand-alone periods (such as when there is a substitute teacher or a mass prep). b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL teachers create their schedules based on the RLAT and classroom teacher schedules then enter their programming minutes into STARS. Principal Dickerson then quickly communicates any problems that arise from the STARS schedules so that these problems can be corrected. The ENL teachers have a standing weekly meeting with the Principal to discuss these and other issues. Each grade level has Integrated ENL for four periods (180 Minutes) which may occur during ELA or during any content subject. This is parallel taught with the classroom teacher. Each grade level also has four periods of Stand-alone ENL instruction for students at the EM and EN level (180 minutes). This is conducted as small group instruction within the classroom aside from occasional targeted instruction periods in which students may be pulled out to work on a specific skill. Additionally, students at the commanding level are brought into the Integrated instructional time for two periods (90 minutes). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Each ENL lesson plan for the integrated instruction includes a content objective as well as a language objective. ENL teachers select social studies and science targets from the curriculum to further develop by pre-teaching vocabulary and giving more explicit background for students to draw upon when they continue to learn that content during their classroom instruction. Teachers draw attention to cognates, use pictures, realia and gestures to help make content comprehensible. Further, native language support is provided as needed with the use of home language dictionaries, picture dictionaries and tablets which are able to utilize electronic translations of text. We have art instructors from Teatro SEA coming in to teach art making, reflecting on art and learning about art history in both Spanish and English. Additionally we allocate some of our Title III funds, Arts for ELLs/SWD program and DonorsChoose funds toward field trips that provide students with greater background in the content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do not as we do not have a TBE or Dual language program. When students are first enrolled, we evaluate them via the Spanish Lab or an informal reading assessment in their home language, but then no longer evaluate proficiency in the home language. We do, however, strongly encourage families during all parent meetings to read in their home languages with their children in support of the goal for all students to achieve bilingual literacy. We provide materials and tests in Spanish through Engage New York and for state tests when appropriate (i.e. when the student is literate in their native language and at the EM/EN level in English. Further, we provide Spanish/English dictionaries to all classrooms with ELLs during testing when they are allowed to use them. If a student is unable to test in Math or Science in English and speaks a language for which a test is not printed, we will ensure 2018-19 CEP 51  the test is verbally translated for the student. If the student has an IEP that indicates the test should be read aloud, the test that is printed will be read in that language by someone fluent in that language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students are targeted for RTI as they need extra help in learning language. Our SIFE students are not able to read in their home language and often have few or no home resources for help with homework. ENL teachers bridge the homework gap as possible by aiding classroom teachers in developing appropriate work for those students. Further, our SIFE and Newcomer students are partnered with successful students who speak their home language, when possible. SIFE and Newcomer students are informally assessed by the ENL teachers on a continuing basis and are taught on the basis of that continuous data. ENL teachers use guided reading tools to teach these students at their instructional level in English and provide home language support as possible. Developing students and former ELLs are taught via in-class co-teaching or small group instruction to provide greater support with vocabulary study, novel studies, writing groups and content area projects. Former ELLs are given 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL instruction via in-class support. Additionally Former ELLs and current ELLs receive ELL testing accommodations for all state tests. Our school has no long-term ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We are newly bringing technology to better aid ELLs and SWDs as our ENL teachers push in to their classrooms. When a student is able to access grade-level materials fully, the ENL teachers work to make the material relevant across the curriculum. When a student is far below grade level, the ENL teachers may use reading materials that are content-aligned but also sensitive to the student's reading level. Each lesson contains a content objective, a language objective and vocabulary that is being explicitly taught. We use a balanced literacy approach that allows students to draw upon what they have learned in prior situations and apply it. This solidifies their learning. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students with IEPs are grouped appropriately with other ELLs to achieve concrete objectives based upon skills assessments. This brings them into the GenEd classroom when possible. Last year there were a couple of ELLs for whom travelling to the GenEd classroom was not a possibility so we brought GenEd to them by bringing one or two peers into the 12-1-1 classroom to study. Our ENL teachers may partner students in adjacent grades to work on specific skills (for example a grade 3 student with an IEP who needs to work on digraphs may be in a reading group with a grade 2 former ELL who is still working toward mastery of the same skill). This is accomplished by pulling a student from one classroom into a group with a student from another classroom during guided reading time. The ENL teachers create their schedules but keep them fluid so as to maximize the time students have for learning content and to adjust to schedule changes for testing, field trips, etc. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention for SIFE and Newcomer students are additional periods of AIS or RTI on skills that are indicated as areas of concern via data accumulated through assessment. Students receive an additional 20 minutes of AIS or RTI to fill in the educational gaps or oral language practice as needed. SIFE students or students whose families need additional support are also serviced by a bilingual social worker as needed. Some Spanish speaking newcomer students have been given access to bilingual paraprofessionals to support their learning in the classroom. Further, our Title III funding supports an after-school program that provides access to a math teacher and an ENL teacher who solidify skills, concepts and vocabulary in English 2018-19 CEP 52  using ENL methodology. During the Title III program, students also receive home language support in Arabic and Spanish via the Imagine Learning software. ENL families also engage in a side-by-side learning program on some Saturdays which gives both students and parents extra language practice in English while encouraging home-language literacy. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We began the aforementioned Side-by-Side learning program last year and had modest success. We plan to build on that success this year by starting the program earlier in the year and probably by extending it in years to come. We also plan to provide classroom teachers with better systems for co-teaching by providing professional development that can assist them in working effectively with their ENL and other counterparts. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We did not have sufficient numbers of newcomer students who spoke the same language in the same or adjacent grade levels. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs who are at the Expanding and Commanding levels are given access to the general education after school and Saturday Academy programs as funding permits. We utilize a Title III funded after school program for students at the Entering, Emerging and Transitional levels so that they can get further home language support and oral language practice. Further, all students are able to access the KIPS Bay after school program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. For students at the Entering through Transitioning levels, Imagine Learning is a program that is used in the classroom during computer time and also in the ENL after school program. This program develops students' reading, speaking and listening skills by letting students record themselves as they sing the lyrics of songs or read texts. Students then get to play back their reading to hear themselves reading. Students also take quizzes on grammar usage and reading comprehension via Imagine Learning. Our school invested two years ago in a number of bilingual texts in Arabic and Bengali as a response to new populations in our community. Last year, those texts came in handy as our populations doubled in those language groups. Students at all levels of language acquisition were further encouraged to utilize iready in their classrooms and in their homes. This program is primarily for reading comprehension and for grammar so it does not develop oral language. During parent meetings and during Side-by-Side learning, parents were introduced to online libraries including uniteforliteracy.com which provides home language support for dozens of languages. As students use this program, they are encouraged to read aloud in English after listening to the text in their home language and in English. We also utilize content area picture dictionaries and bilingual references which help students develop math and science vocabulary. Our ENL teachers also have lent students portable listening centers to allow them to hear the story as they read it. This is considered extra homework for our ELLs who struggle toward English language fluency. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As we have only ENL, we do not assess home language other than at registration when an ENL teacher performs the Spanish LAB test on incoming Spanish speakers. If the student does not speak Spanish, we assess whether or not the student is able to read in his or her home language by interviewing the child's guardian and using bilingual texts. We do deliver home language support by adjusting homework (printing in Spanish or using pictoral clues) by offering side-by-side learning on Saturdays and by providing a bilingual lending library to students in 4 languages. We need to replenish those materials as they are often used. The bilingual story books encourage students to share their reading with their families and are invaluable materials. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Principal Dickerson and Assistant Principal Stokes review the ENL teachers' schedules at the beginning of the year and as changes are made. Further, the ENL teachers update the STARS tool with their service changes throughout the year. ENL teachers reserve one period per week for compliance and use that time to make sure that all students are being appropriately serviced. Further, no student is pushed in to a group that is not on that student's grade level or an adjacent level. 2018-19 CEP 53  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The ENL teachers are present during the week before school to help acclimatize families and fulfill requirements for enrollment (i.e., conduct home language surveys, aid parents with the program selection process, etc.) and as well, the Parent Coordinator provides families with bilingual or Spanish language information that can be used to prepare for the school year. During the school year, ELL families meet at least twice with the ENL teachers and the Parent Coordinator aside from the regular Parent/Teacher Conferences. One meeting is at the beginning of the year so that parents and guardians can get information on the ENL program as well as helpful printed information in their home languages. The second meeting is in January so that parents can ask questions they may have about testing and to pass out materials such as books for their children to read at home. When students are watching a Spanish/English play by Teatro SEA or when they are on a field trip that includes language translation, parents are especially invited to attend that trip. For newcomer ELLs, all field trips include a bilingual paraprofessional whenever possible. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are an elementary school, so the students study English with home language support as necessary and available. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We conduct professional development each Monday between 2:40 and 4pm. Paraprofessionals receive professional development each Monday between 2:40 and 3:50 p.m. Occasionally professional development is done by breaking into groups for targeted training that addresses specific grade levels or subjects. For this training, the ELL teachers are trained with the class that has the most students that they service. Additionally, ENL teachers are sent out of the building to get ENL specific training for roughly 20 hours per year. ENL teachers will provide four Professional Development sessions for our Professional Development Mondays. Each session will be an hour and twenty minutes. The first session will be titled "Strategies for Effective Co-teaching" and will discuss ways to make co-teaching work in a push-in model. The second session will be "Explicitly Teaching Listening to ELLs." This will be a session which turnkeys information from a professional development by the Center for Applied Linguistics. The third session will be "Building a Oral Language Friendly Classroom." The last session will be on "Explicit Vocabulary Instruction." For each of these sessions agendas and sign-in sheets will be kept and maintained in the ENL Program Binder. Our school meets the required 15% ELL-specific professional development for all teachers by offering four PDs conducted by 2018-19 CEP 54  our ENL teachers on the topics listed above. Our school meets the 50% of ELL-specific professional development for ENL teachers by letting teachers attend 20 hours of professional development outside the building. Those topics are not yet known as they are forwarded to us. Agendas and attendance will be kept in the ENL Program binder 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teachers will provide four Professional Development sessions for our Professional Development Mondays. Each session will be an hour and twenty minutes. The first session will be titled "Strategies for Effective Co-teaching" and will discuss ways to make co-teaching work in a push-in model. The second session will be "Explicitly Teaching Listening to ELLs." This will be a session which turnkeys information from a professional development by the Center for Applied Linguistics. The third session will be "Building a Oral Language Friendly Classroom." The last session will be on "Explicit Vocabulary Instruction." For each of these sessions agendas and sign-in sheets will be kept and maintained in the ENL Program Binder. Our school meets the required 15% ELL-specific professional development for all teachers by offering four PDs conducted by our ENL teachers on the topics listed above. Our school meets the 50% of ELL-specific professional development for ENL teachers by letting teachers attend 20 hours of professional development outside the building. Those topics are not yet known as they are forwarded to us. Agendas and attendance will be kept in the ENL Program binder Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides several annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs. In addition to the regular PTC nights and orientation meetings, parents are encouraged to speak to the ENL teachers on any given Tuesday between 2:40 and 3:15. ENL teachers make time to discuss NYSESLAT results in September during a meeting in which parents are given their Continuing Services letters. Finally, parents are sent ENL Program newsletters three times per year to let them know about upcoming field trips, the Side-by-Side learning program, and student achievements. When parents are not available during Tuesday afternoons, ENL teachers have made other time available or have spoken on the phone with the parents to keep them apprised of student progress. We will use the telephone translation services if need be and of course ensure that materials from the school are available in the parent's language of choice. We have records of attendance (sign-in sheets) for meetings with parents. We will begin keeping call logs as well for when ELL teachers contact parents or when parents call to speak with us. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents took part in Parent days in Fathers Bring their Children to School day, and school celebrations throughout the year, including a Veterans Day Celebration where students performed, a living Museum where students represented the subjects of biographical research and as well took part in our Side-by-Side learning program. The families in that program had a food and culture celebration where each family brought a dish that was enjoyed by their culture and spoke about their experiences immigrating to the U.S. That program incorporated one hour of parents working together to read with their children and then one hour of adult ENL as the children worked using technology and books with the co-teacher. Records are kept as parents sign-in to the school. As well, any ELL-Specific parent engagement activities have sign-in sheets for parents which are kept in the ENL Program Binder. Spanish translation is available in our building at any time and at most times, so is Bengali. Our attendance teacher is fluent in Arabic. For all meetings for which there is not an in-house translator, telephone translation will be accessed. 2018-19 CEP 55  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. An area in which our LAP must address the needs of the future is to look closely at how we translate for parents whose home language is not Spanish. We plan, this year, to access more bilingual reading materials and to create greater access for all parents of ELLs, regardless of home language. We also need to account for an ever-increasing number of newcomer and SIFE students in our school whose numbers have risen over the last three years. We continue to build relationships via committee work (SIT) and during inquiry and co-planning times. We also continue to consider ELLs not only during ELL centered PD, but as a component of all PD. 2018-19 CEP 56 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jeanna Dickerson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Samuel Randall School DBN: P.S. 1 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jeanna Dickerson Title Principal Darlene Stokes Assistant Principal Mildred Jimenez Parent Coordinator Debra RymerNancy Caban ENL/Bilingual Teacher Natalie Paulino Parent Ms. Martinez, Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Deneen Davis Maria Maglaras Coach Coach Ms. Barbara Godwin School Counselor Dr. Karen Ames Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Lillian Fleshman Whitaker Other Assistant Principal Paulette Owens Other Related Service Provider Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 9/9/2017 2018-19 CEP 58 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: The Samuel Randall school Superintendent: Dr. Karen Ames DBN: 08x138 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mildred Jimenez Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During registration, an ENL teacher is present for the HLIS interview. Often the person brings a family member or friend who is bilingual. If not, a school-based interpreter is found if fluent or, if necessary, the Translation Unit is called. Parents are given the HLIS form in their language if it is in one of the available languages (as is the case with the Parent Survey and Program Agreement form and the parent brochure. During ELL parent orientation, the parent is also shown the orientation video in his or her home language if it is one of the available languages. The Parent Coordinator, ENL Teachers and Pupil Accounting secretary all access the RCPL report as well as information from the HLIS, the Student Emergency Contact Cards and from teachers during parent Engagement. 2018-19 CEP 59  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English and Bengali, Spanish only, English only. ELLs comprise 8.46 percent of our school population. 91.54 prefer communication in English only. English, Arabic, and Spanish. 0.83% prefer oral language in Bengali. 0.83% prefer oral language in both English and Arabic. 0.55 prefer oral language in either English or Spanish. 6.10% prefer oral language in Spanish only. After reviewing our Adult Preferred Language Report it was determined that our school has several languages which parents use, even though they may say they prefer correspondences in both their home language and English. Some parents prefer two languages if the parents are dominant in different languages. Home languages for our school include English, Bengali, Arabic, English and Arabic, 0.83% prefer written communication in Bengali and English. 0.83% prefer written communication in Arabic and English. 0.55 prefer written communication in Spanish and English. 6.10% prefer written communication in Spanish only. English and Spanish, Spanish only, English only. Urhobo, Wolof, and Tagalog. Spanish and English Spanish Bengali, Bengali and English, Arabic and English, Arabic, English 0.83 prefer oral communication in Bengali and English. 0.83 prefer oral communication in Arabic and English Spanish and English 0.55 prefer oral Spanish communication in Spanish and English. 6.10% prefer oral communication in Spanish only. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none other than English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 60  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coordinator translates written documents as needed throughout the school year. PS 138X will provide parent/guardians whose primary language is covered through the Translation and interpretation Unit with translated documents such as handbooks, the school's newsletter, the ENL Newsletter, calendar of events, notices for parent teacher conferences, invitations to after school programs, workshops and special family events. Our goal is to increase the parent/guardian's understanding of academic standards, assessments, state testing and alternate learning opportunities for their student. Directions for translating materials have been given to all teachers to ensure the timely translation of necessary materials for parents. Families Newsletters: 10 months a year Phone Blasts: As needed to inform parents of events at the school. ENL newsletter: seasonally. Most letters and fliers are bi-lingual in Spanish and English as needed. DOE fliers and notices are in home language as appropriate. Meetings are conducted with parents, as needed, with translator. Signage in preferred written languages. September 6th Done by Board of Ed (Posters, etc). Documents that contain student specific information, including legal, As needed at registrationor IEP meetings Staff members utilise the LIS Solutions document translation 2018-19 CEP 61  special education, ELL, RTI, health and safety will be translated by approved DOE vendors or certified bilingual staff members. A copy of parent's rights is kept in all languages in the Main Office. Registration materials in the appropriate home language are printed as needed from the intranet page. September 6th services as need throughout the school year. Interpretations Services can be requested by any staff member for IEP meetings, Parent Association meetings and Parent/ Teacher Conferences as needed throughout the school year. This is provided in all the preferred written languages 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? For parents who speak Bengali and Spanish, we have fluent teachers and paraprofessionals who are able to interpret. For parents who need interpretation in Arabic, we will utilize a telephone translation service. PS 138 will provide interpretation services at open school nights,and In-house bilingual staff will interpret for parents and teachers at conferences for Spanish speakers. Upon request outside interpreters will be hired for all languages for which translation cannot be accommodated by staff. Parents are an invaluable resource for the teacher and an important link in the chain of success for their child at school. ELL Parent Orientations in September, October, and then as new parents register. Open House, September 21st. Parent Teacher Conferences November 16th, and March 15th. ELL Bilingual Book Swap March 20. parent conferences, November 16th, March 15th ELL parent meetings Orientation was September 21st and October 24th. The Bilingual Book Swap will be March 20th We will utilize bilingual staff and the Language Line as needed. We will utilize bilingual staff and the Language Line as needed. 2018-19 CEP 62  ENL Side-by-Side Saturday Academy for parents and their students Will be each Saturday in April, starting April 7th and ending May 5th We will utilize bilingual staff and the Language Line as needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will utilize bilingual staff and the Language Line as needed. The person calling will first consult the HLIS to determine which language is preferred for oral communication and then will ensure that a speaker proficient in that language, via staff or the Language Line, is available to make the call. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During a professional development by the ENL teachers, Ms. Jimenez will jump in to present this information. Teachers will be given a cheat sheet of resources for translation and ENL materials. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The LAC will work with the PS 138 staff to create an atmosphere where parents and teachers are aware of and understand how to access language assistance services. Welcome posters from the Language Access Kit will be displayed in the main entrance. Parent's Bill of Rights and the Expect Success Guide in their requested language at the beginning of every school year. These documents will inform parent of their rights and what language services are available. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent involvement will be monitored by teachers and the parent coordinator. Parent surveys will be conducted to ensure needs are being met and what additional services need to be put in the place at PS 138. Increasing parental engagement is important to the vital to the success of our students. A language barrier should not inhibit the involvement of parents at our school. We have taken feedback from our HLIS forms as well and will implement the languages of choice for parents by using the LIS Solutions translation service for our parent newsletters. 2018-19 CEP 63 
