2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X151 School Name: J.H.S. 151 LOU GEHRIG Principal: SOCORRO RIVERA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Lou Gehrig Academy 320700010151 6, 7 and 8 School Number (DBN): 07X151 250 E 156 th Street, Bronx, NY 10451 (718) 292-0260 (718) 292-5704 Phone Number: Fax: Socorro Rivera SRivera22@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Socorro Rivera Maritza Ford Pedro Guillen Felicia Hogan Zahidah Segui NA District Information Geographical District: 07 Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Avenue, Bronx, NY 10451 Superintendent’s Office Address: ralvarez4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 742-6500 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx (718) 742-6548 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458/1230 Zerega Ave., Bronx, NY 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: (718) 828-7776/(718)741-8895 (718) 828-6280 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Socorro Rivera Maritza De Jesus Pedro Guillen Mariliam Aguilo Frined Olivo Ana Feliz Ana Vidal *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Crystal Salisbury Felicia Hogan Noemi Rodriguez Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school mission reads: “Lou Gehrig Academy/M.S. 151, a small heterogeneously diverse school community, will enable and empower all students to become caring, competent, and responsible citizens who value education as a lifelong process. With a stronghold on partnerships with home and community, we will ensure that all students receive the utmost care in an environment that promotes their social, physical, emotional and intellectual development.” Our school’s mission reflects our core beliefs in improving and sustaining our school culture, where 2018-19 CEP 9  our students feel safe, supported and challenged by all members of the community, including their own selves as they learn to self-reflect and self-assess, which will positively impact student behaviors and student achievement. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Lou Gehrig Academy/M.S. 151 is located a few blocks from the Bronx County Courts along Grand Concourse and the Yankee Stadium at 161 st Street. We currently service 236 middle school students (grades 6. 7 and 8, 118 males and 118 females) who occupy the third and fourth floors of the building that is shared with P.S./M.S. 31 and KIPP Academy. There are 12 classes in the school: 6 general education (3 in bilingual settings), 3 special education, and 3 Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT). Sixty-eight percent (68%) of our population is of Hispanic ethnicity, and 26% of our students are Afro-Americans. All students are eligible for free lunch. Our administrative /instructional supervisors consist of the principal and the assistant principal. We have 3 instructional coaches/mentors for all content areas, and we have 1 part-time dean of discipline. We have 41 members of staff, 20 of whom are ADVANCE eligible teachers, and the rest makes up the support staff, a few of whom do not report to the school on full-time basis (Related Services). There is one school-based mandated guidance counselor, one SAPIS worker, and 3 (1 guidance counselor & 2 social workers) who are assigned to the school through the Single Shepherds Program. An attendance teacher reports to our school once a week to meet with our Attendance Team whose effort is geared towards improved attendance rate. Our attendance rate last year was 90%. We have partnerships with the Department of Transportation (Project Vision Zero) and Bronx BIDS that work with our students projects regarding street safety, NYPD #44 in presenting to our students about gangs, suicide and violence prevention , Center for Educational Innovation for teacher professional development, Educators for Student Success for consultancy in math improvement, STEM Strategies for science and math PD, Black-Clawson, Inc. for parent involvement and engagement, NY Yankees Reading Clinic for reinforcement of reading strategies among our students, Lincoln Center for Education for a 5-year partnership on cultural responsiveness through theater arts, Bronx Museum of the Arts for visual arts, WE Program for community service and involvement, Arts on Stage for student trips to view to expose them to theater arts, Viva Flamenco through the Arts for ENLs & SWDs for dance and movement, College Access 4 All for college awareness among the 7th graders, Urban Advantage for science teacher PD, Mighty Milers for wellness and fitness, Penny Harvest and City Harvest for community service (proceeds to St. Jude's Children's Hospital). Our school's CBO is New York Edge, formerly known as Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF). M.S. 151 is a school "IN GOOD STANDING". Our educational programs are designed in alignment with the NYC instructional expectations, and our school harnesses its strength and stamina on the improvement of programs that are geared towards the implementation of the Framework for Great Schools to build capacity in the school community. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school has 82 English as a New Language students (ENLs), which is 32% of the school population, and 26% of our student body consists of Students With Disabilities (SWDs), 11% in self-contained classroom setting and 15% in ICT setting. The number of ENLs at each language proficiency level in our school is, as follows: 13 commanding, 16 expanding, 18 transitioning, 18 emerging and 11 entering. Our ENLs come from the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Mexico, Honduras, Gambia, Nigeria and Yemen. Languages spoken are Spanish, Swahili, Arabic, Ibo, Malay, among others. 2018-19 CEP 10  Our SWDs who are in self-contained, ICT and SETSS settings because of different learning disabilities/impairments need much scaffolding and support in their learning, such as the implementation of the RtI, (Response to Intervention), AIS (Academic Intervention Services), multiple entry points, etc., to meet their special/specific learning needs. The social-emotional development is also a need that is being strongly addressed through counseling (individual or group) and other strategies to support our students growth in their intra- and inter-relationships. We have 61 STH and 8 SIFE students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Of the elements in the Framework for Great Schools, M.S. 151 made the most progress in Strong Family-Community Ties (4.17) & Collaborative Teachers (4.06) as per the NYC School Survey 2017-18. The element of TRUST received a score of 3.94. Our school culture has improved tremendously over the past year, as evidenced in the 2017-18 NYC School Quality Guide. We have strengthened family involvement/engagement in our school as well as the work of teacher teams as pedagogical staff collaborate in revising and adjusting curricula and aligning them to the CCLS standards. We have implemented Socratic Seminars in the classrooms to increase student engagement and improve questioning techniques among teachers and students. Our teacher teams utilize Data Wise in conducting action research and engaging in inquiry process. Based on all the relevant data --- NYS assessment results, NYC MOSL reports, PPO feedback, Advance MOTP reports, formative assessment outcomes, among others --- that we have examined and analyzed, our SLT determined that Rigorous Instruction & Supportive Environment are our areas of focus. We need to strengthen the instructional core through the teachers' efforts to apply pedagogical practices that include authentic assessments that drive planning/preparation and instruction. We have to ensure that our curricula are aligned to CCLS and/or content standards and instructional shifts, resulting to greater impact in student learning and increased school achievement. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X151 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 261 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 45 45 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 99.0% % Attendance Rate 95.4% % Reduced Lunch 33.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 70.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.25 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 14.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 18 18 4 89.4% 3.4% 24.5% 26.8% 0.0% 0.4% 2 26% 7.5 5.3% 34% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. As per the 2018 NYS ELA and mathematics assessment results, 14.2 % met the standards in ELA (3% increase compared to the previous year's result) and 5.3% met the standards in mathematics (3% increase compared to the previous year's result). Based on the NYSESLAT results, 13 ENLs are on the commanding language proficiency level, 16 expanding, 18 transitioning, 18 emerging and 11 entering. Of the 84 students with IEPs in our population, 19 students are also identified as ENL. Because of the number of students in our school who required to be placed in an ICT setting, we now have 3 ICT classes were created (1 in each grade), and 1 teacher licensed in Special Education was hired. In comparing the NYC MOSL Beginning-of-Year (September 2017) and End-of-Year assessments (May 2018), there was a significant increase in the overall student performance in ELA and a marginal increase in math. BFSC and District Office Instructional Support Team are working with the math teacher team so that the teachers could improve their pedagogical practice and become familiar in using the CMP3 curriculum. Inter-visitations are scheduled for colleagues to better understand our school’s effective practices, and in turn, use the practices to strengthen instructional skills and knowledge. Supplemental materials were procured so as to enhance or reinforce concepts and skills in all content areas. The MOTP data shows that out of 20 eligible teachers, 1 teacher received an overall rating of HIGHLY EFFECTIVE, 17 teachers received EFFECTIVE overall, and 2 scored DEVELOPING overall. Based on the Advance Teacher Performance Overview. On component 3b in the instructional domain, the overall score was 2.67 on the Danielson rubric, the lowest score out of all the rated components. 2. Our students have not shown significant progress academically as compared to other schools citywide. In math, only 5.3% of our students performed on the proficiency level in math. As per the 2018 NYS examination results , our ENLs and those in the lowest third of our population did not show significant progress/growth in both ELA and math tests. The report further showed that we were unable to improve the performance of the Students with Special Needs population, whose results showed that majority performed on Level 1 in mathematics and ELA. A comparative analysis of student performance in the NYC MOY and EOY periodic assessments revealed that while the assessment outcomes for ELA matched the district performance average in each grade level, this was not the same with math, in which 6th grade scored an average of 19.8% against the district's 35.6%, 7th grade scored 19.6% against the district's 43.0, and 8th grade an average of 16.4 against the district's 38.0. Through the analysis of student work, we found that our students lacked the necessary math problem solving skills to perform well in the constructed response portion of the state and city assessments (as assessed using math power standards MA.6.6.RP.3, MA.7.7.RP.3 and MA.8.8.F.2) . Our priority need, therefore, is to improve our students' problem solving skills in order for our students to meet or exceed the standards on the NYS assessments in 2019. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 13  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all math teachers will plan and implement academic tasks with multiple entry points that emphasize rigorous math problem solving skills as measured by a 10% increase in students performing on Levels 3 and 4 in the NY state math assessments. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will be provided with PD 3 times a year on data analysis and planning for instruction that focus on differentiation and personalized mastery learning for improved problem solving skills . The school-wide template for curriculum mapping and unit planning, as well as the Data Wise agenda template, will be provided to each team. In teacher team meetings, team leaders will facilitate the analysis of benchmark data each week, and use this analysis to identify planning strategies that support the development of performance tasks involving problem solving in the curriculum map, unit planning and daily lesson planning with a focus on increasing the cognitive challenge for all students. The effectiveness of problem solving skills will be monitored through the cycles of student work on benchmark assessments --- BOY, MOY and EOY--- as well as through formal and informal observations conducted by the administrative team. Teachers will attend offerings of professional development sessions for instructional implementation of CMP3, iReady, SchoolNet and RtI that will facilitate the use of instructional materials, including software, manipulative and hands-on materials, textbooks and work sheets. Teachers will meet twice a week with math staff support persons from FSC and Data Specialist to collect, navigate and analyze all available data, including item analysis of unit tests, etc., to inform teachers in planning lessons. Monthly meetings will be conducted by PD Team/Staff Development Committee to evaluate/assess needs based on Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and students 9/2018 - 6/2019 Math Teachers 9/2018 - 6/2019 Teachers of math 9/2018 - 6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Coach, Professional Development Team Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Coach, Professional Development Team Asst. Principal and Team Leaders Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Coach, Professional Development Team 2018-19 CEP 15  data, observation reports and teacher feedback, and plan differentiated PD for teachers. Teachers of math 9/2018 - 6/2019 Principal, AP, FSC math staff developer, Instructional Coach, PD Team Team leaders and PD Team/Staff Development Committee will meet with the principal weekly to evaluate the effectiveness of the problem solving component in the curriculum. Based upon these cycles of observation, the PD Team will make modifications to the professional development plan to ensure that teachers are provided with additional training to support the planning and preparation of lessons. Administrators will engage in continuous observation and feedback cycles. Each cycle will last approximately four weeks, and will provide teachers with actionable feedback and next steps for improvement. Teachers will be provided with targeted professional learning opportunities based upon each cycle of observation, with next steps including, but not limited to, inter-visitations, in-house professional learning opportunities, buddy teachers and learning modules. Teachers in teams will meet twice a week to develop performance tasks involving problem solving for all learners. This work will be based on a cycle of inquiry including the analysis of student performance on periodic assessments. Learning walks focused on planning, instruction and assessment will be conducted bi-weekly by administrators and teachers to evaluate practices in place and provide immediate and actionable feedback to math teachers. Math teachers 9/2018 - 6/2019 Math teachers 10/2018 - 5/2019 PD Team and Teachers 10/2018 - 5/2019 10/2018 - 6/2019 Math teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Coach, Data Specialist Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Coach, Professional Development Team Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Coach, Team Leaders, Professional Development Team 2018-19 CEP 16  Math teachers 9/2018 - 6/2019 Coaches and Math teachers 10/2018 - 4/2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Principal, AP, Team Leaders and Instructional Coach 2018-19 CEP 17  IEP reviews will be conducted monthly during the SIT (School Implementation Team) meetings to assess and evaluate student progress in problem solving, enabling teachers to modify instruction aligned to the CCLS and curriculum framework. Special Education teachers, SBST and students 10/2018 - 5/2019 9/2018 - 6/2019 Assistant Principal and Bronx FSC/NYS Instructional Support in Special Education PD consultants from iReady, Newsela, STEM and ESS will provide external instructional or technical support/ assistance in technology integration through PBL and media-based instruction for problem solving skills reinforcement. The school will implement the Math RtI (that targets problem solving skills) to support student achievement on the math exams. Three teachers (one of them the SETSS teacher and another one an ESL teacher) and the paraprofessionals will be identified and provided PD in the program, including coaching visits to support the program implementation. Students will be targeted based upon a variety of student performance data, and receive instruction in the Math RtI Program twice a week for a total of 90 minutes. This program will be supervised by the principal through biweekly meetings with teachers and paraprofessionals to monitor student progress as measured by the assessment materials in the program. Teachers and students Principal and Assistant Principal At-risk students, ENL students and SWDs 9/2018 - 6 /2019 Principal, identified teachers, paraprofessionals 2018-19 CEP 18  Families will be provided with information regarding the development of a CCLS aligned, rigorous Math curriculum during a curriculum night in September and during Parent-Teacher Conferences on 3 additional evenings during the school year. These conferences will be communicated through letters, phone calls and instant messaging. Furthermore, families will receive a monthly calendar, inviting them to events sponsored by the school in collaboration with the school's CBO partners, Sports & Arts in Schools Foundation, and Lincoln Center for Education. These events will include workshops on the CCLS and strategies to support student learning at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All parents and families 9/2018 - 5/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, SASF, LCE and Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will receive invitations to all the meetings that will be conducted pertaining to instruction and curriculum beginning August 2018. Parents/Families of incoming 6th graders will be invited to the orientation program on August 29, 2018 for a training on understanding Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core curricula. Getting involved in these may promote parent/family engagement that can impact student achievement. Throughout the year, PA and SLT meetings will include in their agenda home connections for rigorous student learning. Principal/Assistant Principal will monitor monthly the implementation of this action plan by the parent coordinator. Our partnership with different academic, cultural and community-based organizations has allowed us to engage parents in some capacity, such as active participation in projects sponsored by DOT & BID on street safety, Urban Advantage for Botanical Gardens & Bronx Zoo projects, Lincoln Center Education for theater arts, Adult Learning Center for ESL lessons offered to parents with limited English proficiency and lessons in the use of hardware/software so that they can track their children's progress. A series of workshops on mental health and financial literacy is also offered to parents, and they are invited to the school to assist in all the events for the students, such as the Daffodil Gardening Project and Career Readiness events, among others. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. > Professional development - Teachers, paraprofessionals, Instructional Coach, District Support Staff, Bronx Borough Office instructional support, administrators, ESS consultant, EngageNY, NYC Common Core Library, iReady, STEM > Use of data - teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, SBST, instructional coach/mentor, Bronx Borough instructional support, District Support Staff, Data Specialist, administrators, SchoolNet, EngradePro, iReady > Supplementary problem skills materials > iPads and mini iPads, laptops, software (iReady, Math on Spot videos, Interactive Lessons, Khan Academy, Boardworks, Word Generation, Discovery, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 19  > Per session hours for teachers and 2 supervisors - 2 hrs. from Tuesday thru Thursday for Before- and After-school programs starting October 2018, Saturday Academy and Holiday School (as per budget availability) > Parent involvement to support learning at home – Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, School Leadership Team, guidance counselors, administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals, District Family Advocate, NYC Parent Account System, FACE Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all math teachers will have planned and implemented academic tasks with multiple entry points that emphasize rigorous math problem solving skills as measured by a 5% growth in student performance in comparing the October 2018 NYC math baseline performance task assessment to mid-year 2019 NYC math end-of-year performance task assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) NYC periodic assessments will be used to assess student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. M.S. 151 was awarded a Proficient rating in SCHOOL CULTURE (3.4) during the last Quality Review in November 2017, and based on the 2018 School Performance Dashboard, our school's supportive environment component scored 3.27 and trust earned 3.94. Also, 65% of our students had 90+ attendance percentage. The SLT considered strongly the importance of sustaining the school’s overall positive tone, culture of collaboration, familial atmosphere, safe & secure environment, and sense of community. On the premise that data-based decision-making aligns curricular instruction and behavioral supports to student and staff needs, our school will adopt the school-wide portfolio system that can support our school in meeting the students' academic and social-emotional needs. By the implementation of this program, we will be able to establish clear expectations for academics and behaviors that are taught, modeled, and reinforced across all settings and by all staff. This provides a host environment that supports the adoption and sustained use of effective academic and social/emotional instruction. 2. Based on the 2018 School Performance Dashboard, M.S. 151 had low impact on student performance and achievement. Eleven percent (14.2%) of our students met the standards in ELA and 5.3% of our students met the standards in math as measured by the NYS assessments. As per the Learning Environment Survey 68% of our students responded that in most or all of their classes, they learn a lot from feedback on their work; 56% of the students responded that in most or all of their classes, they are challenged. Based on the NYC Department of Education Occurrence Report data, showing our school’s 2017-2018 Level 1-5 incidents by infraction type, a total of 50+ infractions (compared to previous year’s total of 33 infractions) were committed. Of all the infractions, B36 in the NYC Discipline Code (Level 4 – Engaging in physically aggressive behavior other than minor altercations under B24, which creates a substantial risk of or results in minor injury) had the highest count of 10, which converts to 20%. Our school's overall OORS data index is 2.25, a little below the city's index of 2.97 and all the junior high schools of 2.78. With the implementation of various programs that address students' social and emotional needs in our school, the students --- represented by the Leadership Phoenix and the Student Council --- will be highly involved in the decision making process in order to achieve academic success. In so doing, the students will continue to develop a sense of ownership in their school community. 3. Focusing on one of our core beliefs that effective classroom management is a crucial factor in effective lesson delivery, the established code of collaboration and standard operating procedures will address the creation of an effective environment of respect and rapport. We have become a Respect for All school in order for our school community to sustain a positive school culture that thrives on respect, responsibility and rigor. Using the Triple Threat behavior tracking system --- quite similar to PBIS ---consequences and rewards are posted and revisited regularly until routines are clearly established and followed. To date we have not used the portfolio system in linking academics with social-emotional development of students; as thus, this will be introduced this school year. With guidance and support from the entire school community, including the strong support that we will receive from our SAPIS worker, guidance counselor and Single Shepherds, our students will be prepared for the challenges within and beyond the walls of M.S. 151. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will participate in programs that promote social and emotional development that will result in a 10% decrease in incidents of bullying and fights/altercations as reported in OORS. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff will be trained by Single Shepherds in implementing Adopt-a-Student Program, in which each staff member will adopt a student for the entire school year for counseling and intervention purposes, including the creation & maintenance of student portfolios, in an arbitrary agreement between staff & student. Single Shepherds, staff and students Students and staff Bi-weekly meetings with Student Council and Leadership Phoenix to discuss student issues, questions and concerns about different topics, including the maintenance of portfolios, affecting their daily lives in the school and beyond. Respect for All curriculum will be adopted to educate the students on supporting one another in managing their own behaviors and emotions. Students will be trained on student-led conferences during Parent-Teacher conferences. Students and staff Students and staff 10/2018 - 6/2019 Principal, AP and Single Shepherds Principal, Assistant Principal and Advisors Principal, Assistant Principal Principal, AP and staff 10/2018- 6/2019 10/2018 - 6/2019 9/2018 - 6/2019 2018-19 CEP 23  Partnership with College 4 All, in which our 7th grade students participate in career readiness activities and events, including the maintenance of character development to highlight achievement Students and staff 9/2018 - 6/2019 Principal, AP, School-based College for All Team Parents to be trained on the Triple Threat (PBIS) system and how they can support teachers and their children in their effective implementation Partnership with Single Shepherd Program, in which 100 students are assigned to a counselor, and one area of support is on behavior management Partnership with Ramapo for Children (Title IV funding) to apply the Restorative Justice three-tier approach with staff and students Title III Grant allocation will be used for academic intervention in all content areas (interdisciplinary approach) in the after-school program for ENL students, and it will include a project on preventing bullying in the school. 11/2018 - Parents, staff and 6/2019 Principal, AP, PC students Students & staff Students & staff 9/2018 - 6/2019 Administrators and Single Shepherd staff 11/2018 - 3/2019 Principal and AP ENL students and staff 9/18 - 6/19 Principal and Assistant Principal Advisories will be part of the program to implement value-infused instruction, including social-emotional development. Students and staff 9/18 - 6/19 Parent-Student Handbook will be distributed to families so that they are aware of the school policies that explain academic and behavioral expectations among students, as well as the responsibilities of the parents in supporting their children’s education. Principal and Assistant Principal Parents and students 9/18 - 16/19 Principal, AP and Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 24  Student Council peer mediation program ( Big Brother, Big Sister ) will allow opportunities for student-to-student interactions in problem solving, including decision making and conflict resolution situations. Students 11/18 - 5/19 Principal, AP and advisor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will receive invitations to all the meetings, conferences and workshops that will be conducted pertaining to behavior management, student-led conferences, student discipline, safety and other factors that impact school culture. In September, all families will receive the updated Parent/Student Handbook so that they are guided by the policies on student safety, as well as parent/student duties and responsibilities. They will also receive copies of the Citywide Behavioral Expectations 6-12 so that they are aware of the Student Intervention and Discipline Code and Bill of Student Rights and Responsibilities. Principal and Assistant Principal will monitor the implementation of the action plan by the parent coordinator. Our partnership with different academic, cultural and community-based organizations has allowed us to engage parents in some capacity, such as active participation in projects sponsored by DOT & BID on street safety, Urban Advantage for Botanical Gardens & Bronx Zoo projects, Lincoln Center Education for theater arts, Adult Learning Center for ESL lessons offered to parents with limited English proficiency and lessons in the use of hardware/software so that they can track their children's progress. A series of workshops on mental health and financial literacy is also offered to parents, and they are invited to the school to assist in all the events for the students, such as the Daffodil Gardening Project and Career Readiness events, among others. Parents will be trained in logging into i-Ready to monitor their children's progress so that they can see the alignment of the assessment results with their quality of work. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - The needed human resources that we will leverage to achieve this annual goal and achieve the action plan are, as follows: the Principal, a functioning Discipline Team, consisting of the AP, Dean, Parent Coordinator, SAPIS worker, Single Shepherds, Guidance Counselors, SLT and PA members and other parents, CBO staff. - Instructional resources will include a variety of materials for distribution to the school constituencies, such as the materials needed for a supportive learning environment, Common Sense Media CIPA Toolkit for NYC DOE Middle Schools, copies of the Parent-Student Handbook that will be distributed among the M.S. 151 families, copies of brochures from all partnering organizations, certificates of recognition, posters, incentive charts, etc. - Advisory periods will be programmed into the daily bell schedule. Overcoming Obstacles will be the curriculum that will 2018-19 CEP 25  be used, and the staff will receive training on its implementation. - Per session monies will be allocated for staff and supervisors for the activities that go beyond school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be evidence of less student bullying and altercations, resulting to a 6% decrease in the incidents reported within OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. As per the 2018 School Quality Guide, 86% of the students responded that their teachers want them to be better thinkers, not just memorize things, and 100% of teachers responded that they had the resources to include opportunities for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from text, both literary and informational. Teacher teams (content area) @ MS 151 are given the opportunity to meet for common planning and other activities, e.g. creating rubrics and checklist for performance tasks, looking at student work, analyzing data, etc. Part of the 80-minute mandated PD is dedicated to additional planning and preparation for instruction or data analysis & interpretation. The NYC School survey also revealed that 95% of teachers feel that all students learn as they continuously improve their teaching and recognize their own innovation and collective responsibility. The 2018 survey element score for the framework component of trust is 4.06 (94%), which is 4% higher than the district average and 4% higher than the city average. 2. As per the May 2019 PPO and 2015 Quality Review, our area of focus lies on Teacher Teams and Leadership Development . It was highly recommended that the teachers meet as a grade level team and content area team every week. It was suggested that the administrators program the meetings into the teachers' schedules in order to give them increased opportunities to engage in professional conversations and professional learning. Another recommendation was to increase the capacity of inquiry teams to engage in action research, inasmuch as only the teachers of ELLs @ M.S. 151 had taken the initiative to form an inquiry team and solve a problem of practice. For the school year 2018-19, all teacher teams, most especially the ELA Team, will have the opportunity to engage in collaborative inquiry study/action research on student writing. The ELA teachers expressed the need for our students to improve their writing skills after they reviewed and analyzed the outcomes of the constructed-response and extended-response portions of the NYC periodic assessments. The ELA Team decided that there is a pressing need to review the units of study in order to design, adjust or modify the performance tasks in all grade levels. They have to ensure that the performance tasks engage students in authentic, high-level work that is aligned to curricular standards based upon teachers' assessment outcomes in order to more carefully plan for instruction that meets students where they are and moves them forward. The performance tasks will be designed to align to particular Common Core State Standards that address writing, and to anchor specific units of study in data collection and close observation of student work. Since our school has a large percentage of students in the bilingual and special education settings, we will get them immersed into various writing strategies. Furthermore, language development is a barrier in the learning process of our ELLs and SWDs. Therefore, the teachers need to examine how students can be taught on how to produce effective writing assignments, and encourage them to continue building their skills. Through increased scaffolding in developing writing skills, our students will gain the ability to become proficient in different forms of writing, as thus increasing student achievement in the NYC periodic tests and the NYS ELA assessments. Based on the 2018 NYS ELA results (Source: 2017-18 Preliminary Report), 50% of the students who took the tests met State standards on the NY State ELA tests. Our school evidently did not meet the AYP; therefore, there is 2018-19 CEP 27  indeed a strong need for us to strengthen our efforts in finding strategies that can support our students in ELA, most importantly in the writing strand. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the ELA teacher team will collaboratively analyze student work products to improve writing skills as measured by a 10% increase in students meeting or exceeding standards in the NYS ELA assessments. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  ELA Team will meet formally and informally to work on their action research project, such as analyzing student work, reviewing/analyzing and creating performance tasks, planning next steps to improve student performance, etc. ELA Team will report weekly findings to other teacher teams either orally or in written form, to be done during the Monday PD. ELA Team will provide progress reports to the students and parents, most importantly PA and SLT. ELA Team will complete a menu of performance tasks appropriate for all subgroups and different grade levels. ELA Team will participate in Rigor Walks to assess the rigor in writing in classrooms. ELA Team will receive a series of training on unpacking the standards, aligning performance tasks to CCLS standards, creating units of study, lessons, etc. Teachers and students Teachers Weekly from 9/2018 - 6/2019 Monthly from 9/2018 - 6/2019 10/2018 - 4/2019 ELA Team, students,parents Teachers July 2018 8/18 - 6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal and Data Specialist Principal, Assistant Principal and Data Specialist Principal, Assistant Principal, Data Specialist and PC Principal and Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Coach/Mentor, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal and Staff Development Committee 7/2018 - 9/2018 10/2018 - 4/2019 Teachers Teachers Teachers 2018-19 CEP 29  ELA Team will receive training on the use and implementation of EngageNY, SchoolNet and other resources. School-based instructional coach will work with the ELA Team in planning and creating performance tasks involving writing strategies, appropriate to different subgroups and grade levels. ELA/ELL Inquiry Team and students Instructional Coach 7/18 - 9/18 Principal, Assistant Principal and Coach 9/18 - 6/19 ELA Team and students Teachers and students Parents and families Parents and families 10/18 - 3/19 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal and Data Specialist Principal and Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator 9/18- 6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator Data specialist will work with ELA Team in analyzing data, the outcome of which will be used for planning and creating the performance tasks involving writing. Identified students in different subgroups will be highly recommended to attend the after-school program and the Saturday Program for the reinforcement of writing skills and strategies in ELA through RtI and AIS. Parent Coordinator will assist in sustaining home-school connection, specifically pertaining to student learning goals, in order for parents to become increasingly involved in their children’s education. Parent Coordinator will plan and conduct workshops on CCLS, ELA curriculum framework, units of study, etc., introduced during the Curriculum Night and followed up throughout the year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will receive invitations to all the meetings that will be conducted pertaining to collaborative teachers and strategies that impact their children's learning. During the Back-to-School Night in September, the families will receive the calendar of the monthly PA and SLT meetings throughout the year, and they will be informed that reminders will be sent by the PC throughout the school year. Progress Report distribution will be in October, January and April, and families will be aware of their children's progress in ELA (and other subjects too) so that they can take action is assisting and supporting their children in academics. There will be a workshop on the understanding of the school's curricula and the instructional goals for 2018-19 so that they can give support to their children at home. Principal and Assistant principal will monitor the implementation of this action plan by the teachers and parent coordinator. Our partnership with different academic, cultural and community-based organizations has allowed us to engage parents in some capacity, such as active participation in projects sponsored by DOT & BID on street safety, Urban Advantage for Botanical Gardens & Bronx Zoo projects, Lincoln Center Education for theater arts, Adult Learning 2018-19 CEP 30  Center for ESL lessons offered to parents with limited English proficiency, lessons on supporting their children in completing homework and projects, and lessons in the use of hardware/software so that they can track their children's progress. A series of workshops on mental health and financial literacy is also offered to parents, and they are invited to the school to assist in all the events for the students, such as the Daffodil Gardening Project and Career Readiness events, among others. Parents will be trained in logging into i-Ready to monitor their children's progress so that they can see the alignment of the assessment results with the quality of the work in their portfolios. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Per session monies for curriculum planning for participating AP and teacher per session - Principal, Assistant Principal, ELA Team, Data Specialist, Staff Development Committee members, ESS ELA Consultant (preferably once a month), Parent Coordinator and parents - Newsela Pro, iReady, EngradePro, EngageNY, SchoolNet, workbooks and worksheets, leveled texts, online texts, curriculum units, CCLS flip charts, and after-school program supplemental materials - iPads, laptops and other equipment as tools for learning - One ELA Team meeting period per week will be programmed aside from the mandated professional activity every Monday to be used for grade/content area meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase among students scoring at proficiency levels as measured by the NYC baseline and mid-year writing performance task assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC Writing Performance Task rubric will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Referring to the 2018 School Quality Guide, MS 151 has an overall rating of 3.74 on the Effective School Leadership capacity framework element (4.00 on Inclusive Leadership, 3.79 on Instructional Leadership, 3.56 on Program Coherence and 3.59 on Teacher Influence). This means that the school leaders align resource use to support instructional goals that meet students' needs, school level theory of action and goals are shared by the school community, and leadership regularly evaluates school level decisions with a focus on the CCLS. With regard to professional development, 100% of teachers agreed that their experiences have been sustained and coherent, and 95% said that they had the opportunities to work productively with colleagues at the school on professional development. A comparative analysis of the NYC MOSL BOY and MOY student performance in writing revealed that there was a 32.63% increase in 6th grade (from 4.17% to 36.8%), 46.63% increase in 7th grade (from 3.57% to 50.2%), and 36.71% in grade 8 (from 5.69% to 42.4%). Although these results could be higher so as to meet or exceed the standards, they equate with the overall district average. 2. The Principal Performance Observation written feedback from our Community School District Superintendent in May 2018 states that one of M.S. 151's areas of focus is on teacher pedagogy (1.2: Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent of set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products), and 2 of the recommended action steps are (1) increased teachers focus on developing high level questioning that create learning opportunities with multiple entry points, and (2) implementation of small learning communities that would help facilitate teacher-to-student gradual release. This means that the teachers have to implement strategies, approaches and methodologies that promote high level thinking and questioning among all students in small learning community settings, and they have to plan for more student-centered lessons, in which they should be facilitators rather than the "sage on the stage". The students should gain ownership of their learning, fully engaged in assigned activities that involve high level thinking and questioning. As per the Learning Environment Survey 2018, 63% of the students responded that teachers ask difficult questions on tests, 51% said that teachers ask difficult questions in class, and 61% stated that they are challenged in their classes. To this effect, the administrators and instructional cabinet have begun reviewing and revising the school's PD Plan. In this plan, we will include intra- and inter-visitations (only 62% of teachers responded in the NYC School Survey about having had the opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development). After looking at all available data in Advance - MOTP Teacher Level Detail Report in May 2018, we found that 20% of eligible teachers achieved a rating of Developing on domain 3b (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques) of the Danielson framework and 7% received a rating of Ineffective. In order to increase rigor in instruction, teachers should receive increased professional development in strategies that would promote high level questioning that leads to student engagement. A potent learning model that addresses the school's need is the Socratic Seminar, which is a form of structured discourse that balances the cultivation of common values and the worth of free inquiry (Bellah 2018-19 CEP 32  et.al 1992). Through the process of active learning and cooperation, Socratic seminars also help build feelings of self-worth that are inextricably tied to feelings of competence --- the ability to independently construct meaning and arrive at thoughtful ideas, and to be validated for this by others (Heath 1994). For 2018-19, content area teachers will continue implementing and using Socratic Seminars, as well as continue participating in professional development sessions geared towards their mastery of this strategy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school leaders creating and implementing a professional development plan that builds teacher capacity in student engagement, at least 90% of all teachers will receive end-of-year MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in component 3c , as measured by end-of-year 2018-2019 Advance ratings. 2018-19 CEP 33 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Principal and AP Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will be trained on constructivist teaching approach, which prompts students to formulate their own questions (inquiry), allow multiple interpretations and expressions of learning (multiple intelligences), integrate literacy strategies in lessons, and encourage group work and the use of peers as resources (collaborative learning). Teachers will revisit PD on the Socratic seminar process, including planning for implementation and instruction. Peer inter-visitations will be scheduled. Content area teacher teams will meet for common planning once a week (part of individual teachers' programs). Grade level teacher teams will meet to plan instruction and revise curriculum framework (if necessary) involving DOK and strategies in increasing student engagement during the 35-minute professional activity every Monday. Teachers Teacher teams will meet to review and plan lessons during a portion of the mandated 80-minute Monday PD. Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers and students 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal and PD Team Principal and PD Team 9/18 - 11/18 Principal and AP 10/18 - 4/19 9/18 - 6/19 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, AP and Lead Teachers 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, AP and Lead Teachers 2018-19 CEP 34 District 7 Team and Bronx Borough Instructional Support District 7 Team and Bronx Borough Instructional Support District 7 Team and Bronx Borough Instructional Support District 7 Team and Bronx Borough Instructional Support District 7 Team and Bronx Borough Instructional Support Principal, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator Principal/AP will create and implement a PD plan for all teacher teams in making Socratic seminars implemented during small learning community settings. Principal, AP and 8/18 - 6/19 Teachers Principal/AP will facilitate teacher teams' development of high-quality questions in performance tasks embedded in the Socratic seminar process that will address students’ diverse needs. Principal, AP and Teachers 9/18 - 11/18 Principal/AP will train teachers in unpacking the standards and aligning instruction to the curricula in order to design unit and lesson plans that incorporate engaging activities effectively, as well as analyze data to prioritize student academic needs. Principal, AP, Data Specialist, and Teachers 9/18 - 6/19 Principal/AP will train the teachers in Universal Design for Learning (UDL) and Adaptations to the Curriculum for ENL students and SWDs. Principal/AP/Data Specialist will train teachers in analyzing different forms of data relevant to effective planning and instruction that incorporate the development of activities that promote student engagement . Parent Coordinator will assist in sustaining home-school connection, specifically pertaining to student learning goals in all content areas, in order for parents to become increasingly involved in their children’s education. Parent Coordinator will conduct workshops with parents on important information about M.S. 151’s curriculum frameworks and units of study. Parents will be invited to visit classrooms all year round. Principal, AP, Coach and Teachers 9/18 Principal, AP and Data Specialist 9/18 - 12/19 9/18 - 6/19 Parents and students 9/18 9/18 - 6/19 Parents Parents, Teachers and students 2018-19 CEP 35  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will receive invitations to all the meetings, workshops and conferences that will be conducted pertaining to instruction and curriculum from September 2018 - May 2019. Parents and families will gain knowledge on the different content area curricula and how they can support their children at home in tackling academic tasks. They will be given the opportunities throughout the year to visit their children's classrooms. During the Back-to-School night in September 2018, parents will gain an understanding of the Socratic Seminar Model and the high level of questioning entailed in its implementation. Parents of ENLs who are non-speakers of English will be offered courses in ESL either twice a week (1 hour lesson per day) after school hours or every Saturday (2 hours). Parents of SWDs will receive training on accommodations and modifications that they can apply at home so that their children can be successful in school. Principal and Assistant Principal will monitor the implementation of this action plan to be carried out by the parent coordinator and other school personnel. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - The needed human resources that we will leverage to achieve this annual goal and achieve the action plan are, as follows: the Principal, AP, Data Specialist, Staff Development Committee members, all teachers, ESS Consultant, Parent Coordinator and parents. - Instructional resources will include hardware & software (Boardworks, Newsela), instructional webinars & web sites, iPads and laptops, textbooks, 2018-19 curriculum units, CCLS flip charts, NYS Next Generation curriculum, EngageNY, Common Core NYC Library, Understanding By Design (McTighe & Wiggins) - At least 2 teacher team meeting periods per week will be programmed (including the 80-minute mandated PD) - Approximately 100 hours of per session for teachers (3) and supervisor (1) will be scheduled for after-school session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of teachers rated ineffective/developing teachers on effective questioning will have increased 1 performance level on Danielson component 3b. 2018-19 CEP 36  By February 2019, school leaders will have provided effective professional development on the development of effective questioning and implementation of Socratic seminars, as measured by a 1.5% increase of teachers who scored at least one performance level higher in the Danielson 3b component. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance teacher evaluation system will be the specific instrument of measure that will assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. As per the 2017-18 NYC School Quality Guide, this capacity framework element scored 4.17, a significant increase from last school year's 2.97. We had a 63% parent survey response rate, a slight decrease from the parent participation rate in 2016-17, which was 65%, and we continue to put forth much effort in increasing parent participation rate in the school. Increased parent involvement/engagement is an important factor in impacting student achievement, and as per the preliminary report (RASP) on the NYS ELA and Mathematics assessments, 50% of our tested students met the standards in ELA and 52% performed satisfactorily in Mathematics. In the Learning Environment Survey, our school scored 96% on parent outreach, 93% on parent-principal trust, and 90% on parent involvement categories. 2. Looking into the percentage of parents that attended all four (4) parent-teacher conferences this school year, we found the following outcome: September 2017 – 23%; November 2017 – 54%; February 2018 – 44%; and, May 2018 – 39%. These percentages indicate that we still need to increase parental involvement in our school by implementing various strategies in which parents/families can be actively involved in the education of their children in the school. In line with the efforts of our parent coordinator, with the support of the PA and the SLT, and her development of a yearlong calendar of events that will promote increased parental involvement, we will utilize EngradePro more effectively as a tool for ongoing communication with parents. As per the NYC School Quality Guide, 81% of parents had positive responses on the Parent Involvement portion of the NYC School Survey. Our school rated -4% lower than the district-wide average and -3% lower as compared to citywide average. This means our school should continue to expend improved efforts in increasing parent involvement in our community. Although we received a Proficient rating for indicator 3.4 (High Expectations) during the last School Quality Review, there is still the need to sustain the strong partnerships that we have cultivated with the parents and families in our school community. Parents who participated in the SQR stated that they understood that the school had high expectations for their children in order to prepare them for the next level, as thus we need to make them understand of the school's expectations for parents to increase their involvement in their children's learning . Pillar #3 in The Four Pillars – A Vision for All New York City Public Schools, which highlights parent/family engagement in every aspect of our students’ school life, is our guide in increasing parental involvement, consequently improving student achievement here at M.S. 151. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of parents will increase involvement in reviewing and monitoring their children's academic performance as measured by EngradePro summary reports. 2018-19 CEP 38  2018-19 CEP 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Train all parents in the use of EngradePro, iReady and SchoolNet so that they can receive ongoing informational data on their children's academic progress. Host frequent parent workshops and conferences (student-led) so that families can learn more about their children’s education and have access to experts in the field (e.g. Parent School Account usage, study habits, homework monitoring, etc.), some to take place during the Parental Engagement time on Mondays. Offer ESL, computer and student portfolio system classes for parents, including those whose children are in the general ed. population, during the Parental Engagement time on Mondays so that they can better support their children’s education. Teachers should increase the use of social media, email, and written publications to expand outreach to parents so that they may better understand and participate in their children’s education, as well as in policy-making decisions (e.g. improvement of the school’s PIP), and be made aware of their children’s progress in school, some to take place during the Parental Engagement time on Mondays. Provide all parents with reasonable access to staff, exclusive of the Monday 40-minute mandate for teachers to reach out to parents. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents and families 9/18, 11/18, 3/19, 5/19 Teachers, parents and families 10/18 - 5/19 Parents and families 9/18- 6/19 Principal, AP, Data Specialist, Teachers, PC Principal, AP and PC Principal, AP, Teachers and PC Principal, AP, Teachers and PC 2018-19 CEP 40  Increase training opportunities for parent coordinator so that she can forge stronger relationships with parents. PC 9/18- 6/19 Invite parents and families to events, field trips and celebrations sponsored by the school, e.g. Literacy Night, Family Night, Field Day, Science Expo, etc. Give commendations to parents in Honor Roll breakfasts, Student of the Month lunches, and other events where their children are honored and recognized. Parents and families Parents and families 9/18 - 6/19 FACE, District Office, Family Advocate and M.S. 151 administration Principal, Assistant Principal and PC 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, AP and Parent Coordinator Invite parents to volunteer and participate in school activities, such as reading aloud to a 6th grade class, or assisting in their children’s classes. Parents and families Utilize the effort and commitment of the PA and SLT to conduct activities that promote increased parental involvement, such as fundraisers, sports events (e.g. basketball between parents and school staff), BBQ Day (in the park), Spring Art Festival, etc. Continue the implementation of the open-door policy for all parents and families, and host open house events. Parents and families 9/18 - 6/19 Principal, AP and Parent Coordinator 9/18 - 6/19 Administration, PA and SLT, PC M.S. 151 administration and staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 41  Parents and families will receive invitations to all the conferences, workshops and meetings that will be conducted throughout the year. During the Back-to-School Night in September, the families will receive the calendar of the monthly PA and SLT meetings throughout the year, and they will be informed that reminders will be sent by the PC throughout the school year. SASF (Sports & Arts in Schools Foundation) is the school's CBO that supports family and community engagement. Lincoln Center for Education, Black & Clawson, DOT, BID and Urban Advantage partner with us in engaging parents and families actively in their children's learning. Principal and Assistant principal will monitor the implementation of this action plan. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - The needed human resources that we will leverage to achieve this annual goal and achieve the action plan are, as follows: FACE, BFSC, CSD 7 Family Advocate, Principal, AP, Parent Coordinator, Data Specialist, teachers, guidance counselors, SBST, SAPIS worker, Single Shepherds, office staff and parents. - Instructional resources will include Parent-Student Handbooks, iPads and laptops, CCLS handouts, Parent School Account and other relevant information from FACE - Central Office, District Office and M.S. 151. - Scheduling of parent meetings and events will be done by PC, in collaboration with PA and SLT, and the administration. - Approximately 40 hours of per session will be allocated for 2 teachers and 1 supervisor for activities that fall beyond office hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 40% of parents will have reviewed and monitored their children's academic progress as measured by EngradePro parent log-in summary reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. EngradePro parent log-in summary reports will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All M.S. 151 students performing on Proficiency Levels 1 and 2 on the State Assessments and on MOSL assessments All M.S. 151 students performing below appropriate grade level on the F& P running records Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Word Generation – vocabulary program for middle school students Readtheory.org–online resource for beginning & emerging ENLs NewsELA– strengthens reading comprehension skills in all subjects Great Leaps - remedial reading practice to develop fluency for the emergent readers small group, one-to-one, whole class small group, one-to-one, whole class small group, one-to-one small group one-to-one during the school day, after school during the school day, after school during the school day, after school during the school day Title III after school (T, W and Th – 4 hrs. total) during school day during school day during school day during school day, after school Language Power (ELA skills reinforcement or enrichment) small group, whole class Fountas & Pinnell (Running Records) whole class Writing on Demand whole class Independent Reading Time/Sustained Silent Reading Close reading, guided reading, whole class, small group 2018-19 CEP 43  summarizing, chunking the text whole class, small group during school day Interactive reading/writing Boardworks Literature – understanding genre and connecting reading to writing Brain Pop – animated educational resource whole class, small group small group, whole class small group. one-to-one Conferences Graphic organizers during school day, after school during school day, after school during school day whole class, small group, one-to-one during school day, after school during school day during school day, after school during school day, after school during school day during school day during school day, after school during school day, after school Journaling, reflective writing Boardworks – math games, problem solving strategies Brain Pop – animated educational resource Mathematics All M.S. 151 students performing on Proficiency Levels 1 and 2 on the State Assessments and on MOSL assessments whole school, small group whole class, small group whole class, small group whole class, small group, one-to-one Workshop Model components whole class Problem of the Week Math Blitz – mathematical cognitive training whole class, small group whole class, small group, one-to-one 2018-19 CEP 44  through games and simulations (SASF) whole class, small group during school day Science All M.S. 151 students who score below 60% on the MOSL All M.S. 151 students who failed the science course the previous year during school day one-to-one, group small group during school day, after school Word Generation – vocabulary program for middle school students Applied Math – project based curriculum conferences Do the Math - to reinforce numberand numeration Word Generation – vocabulary program for middle school students whole class, small group, one-to-one during school day, after school whole class during school day Workshop Model components whole class, small group during school day, after school Science Blitz – scientific cognitive training through games and simulations (SASF) Reading Nonfiction-Writing connection (RAFT strategy) Urban Advantage/American Museum of Natural History – Middle School Science Initiative whole class, one-to-one during school day whole class whole class whole class, small group whole class, small group, one-to-one during school day during school day during school day during school day, after school during school day, after school whole class, small group, one-to-one Hands-on experiments 2018-19 CEP 45  Social Studies All M.S. 151 students who score below 60% on the MOSL All students who failed the s. studies course the previous year At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Identified at-risk students in all subgroups (based on all available data) Discovery Education - accelerates school’s digital transition through comprehensive standards-based content Graphic organizers Word Generation – vocabulary program for middle school students Reading Nonfiction-Writing Connection (RAFT writing strategy) TIME Magazine online – history, social issues and current events DBQs and political cartoon analysis Project Based Learning (with media and technology integration) Discovery Education - accelerates school’s digital transition through comprehensive standards-based content Graphic organizers Counseling Teaching for information Project based counseling whole class, small group, one-to-one during school day, after school whole class, small group, one-to-one during school day during school day whole class, small group, one-to-one during school day during school day during school day, after school during school day, after school whole class, small group, one-to-one whole class, small group, one-to-one whole class, small group, one-to-one Whole class, small group, one-to-one small group, one-to-one small group, one-to-one during school day during school day during school day, after school small group, one-to-one 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) I.S. 151 has 57 Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Aside from educational services to ensure that homeless children and youth progress academically, other services that we are planning to provide to our STH population are, as follows: emergency supplies such as uniforms, school supplies, books, backpacks and eyeglasses (if needed); transportation expenses (once the student is permanently housed); counseling services; outreach efforts to parents, social workers, counselors, etc. involved in the student's life; intervention programs based on needs; and, data collection to assess the needs/progress of STH. Single Shepherds will be assigned to conduct individual and group counseling sessions with STH to address social emotional issues that may affect their performance in school, and they will also visit the homes of the STH with low attendance rates and whose parents are totally not involved in their children's education (e.g. non-attendance of school events and conferences, lack of response to calls from school staff, etc.). STH with academic challenges will be given AIS small-group instruction, and they will be highly recommended to enrol in after-school academic programs and Saturday School with parental consent. Progress will be tracked so as to determine degree of intervention needed and assess their progress academically. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 47  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 48  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The teaching credentials of staff working at M.S. 151 shall meet the requirements established by the state and city legislation to ensure that they are “highly qualified”. The resources of the NYCDOE will be utilized to fill all vacancies so that all newly hired staff will be processed by the Human Resources Office to ensure that all staff members satisfy the state and city mandates. Members of staff from M.S. 151 have been selected from DOE Job Fair candidates, and outreach is made to Teach for America and the Teaching Fellows in order to find certified staff. Recommendations from the Borough Field Support Center and District Office are also highly considered. Current staff members have received intensive professional development, and the new staff members also receive the same, including mentoring. In addition to in-house staff development/ training offerings, teachers receive support from Central Office, Bronx Field Support Center, the Superintendent and CSD 7 instructional support specialists/staff developers, as well as outside consultants. M.S. 151 will ensure that highly qualified teachers possess a deep knowledge of the subjects they teach, demonstrate the teaching skills necessary to help all students achieve high standards, create a positive learning environment, use a variety of assessment strategies to diagnose and respond to individual learning needs, integrate technology into curriculum to support student learning, collaborate with colleagues, parents, and community members and other educators, reflect on their practices in order to improve future teaching and student learning, pursue professional growth into both content and pedagogy, and instill a passion for learning in students. Every teacher will exhibit evidence of firm understanding of how students learn through the implementation of diverse strategies in classroom instruction. Data-driven instruction will be implemented so that a comprehensive analysis of various forms of assessment is conducted so as to effect improvement in student performance. M.S. 151 attends city- and borough-wide recruitment events. The Human Resources Office of Recruitment identifies vacancies at the school and refers potential candidates for interview. MS. 151 will focus on these areas to attract and retain highly qualified teachers: certification reform, professional development, compensation strategies, and support in all areas that the job entails. Our goal is to reduce barriers and increase standards, which means that teachers will be directed to diverse routes to being licensed, such as alternative certification for people entering the field of teaching. Ongoing, meaningful, systemic, and professional development will be provided so as to give teachers the opportunities to grow personally and professionally. Highly qualified teachers will receive recommendations to pursue 2018-19 CEP 49  higher education through programs that support their efforts with financial assistance and for the advancement in their chosen fields of specialization. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In response to current reform initiatives, educators are being asked to master new skills and responsibilities and to improve their practice. To meet these new expectations, everyone involved in the education of the students @ M.S. 151 needs to deepen their content knowledge and learn new methods of teaching. They are given more time to work with colleagues, critically examine the Common Core State/Learning standards in aligning their lessons to them, and implement the new curricula. They have opportunities to develop, master and reflect on new approaches to working with students with varying levels of performance through peer coaching, modeling and inter-visitations. All of these activities encompass professional development @ M.S. 151. Professional development refers to processes and practices that improve the job-related knowledge, skills, values and attitudes of all the school constituencies. These skills, knowledge, values and attitudes should ensure the intellectual, physical, emotional and social development and well-being of each student, including those with exceptional needs. We focus on student success, specifically increased achievement or improved performance. It is, therefore, imperative that practitioners --- teachers, paraprofessionals, administrators --- acquire new or improved skills and knowledge to bring about student success. The professional development process must be ongoing, interesting, and should meet the needs of all educators. Significant improvement requires the support of all those who have a stake in the future of the students at M.S. 151. Administrators, teachers, parents, community leaders, school staff, and the students themselves work collaboratively towards the improvement of the entire school; together, we have become actively involved in the teaching-learning process. It is imperative that all teachers are trained in familiarizing themselves with the Danielson Framework and strive to be Highly Effective in all domains/components. In delivering effective professional development, the focus is on the core problems of teaching and learning. Strategies in our school address immersion, curriculum, examination of practice, collaborative work, and vehicles & mechanisms (common planning and teacher team meetings, workshops, institutes, courses, and seminars). Everyone is given the opportunities to become intellectually engaged with their subject matter and to deepen their understanding of key concepts, as well as the opportunities to try new approaches in supportive environments. They have access to their colleagues and are encouraged to share, discuss, and reflect on their practice, and time is provided for these collegial activities. Most importantly, they are immersed to the Danielson rubric as they master the strategies that focus on developing awareness, building knowledge, helping themselves translate new knowledge into practice, practicing teaching, and providing opportunities to reflect deeply on the teaching and learning process. DOK, Hess Matrix and Bloom's Taxonomy will be the teachers' reference when generating questions that promote student thinking. Socratic circles/seminars will continue to be used for discussion and discourse that leads to student engagement. Effective assessment practices employed by teachers drive instruction such as observations, questioning to elicit student understanding, exit tickets, parking lots, use of rubrics and checklists, peer and self assessment tools, etc. MS 151 uses evidence-based instructional strategies or other successful models that show evidence of efficacy to support instruction in all content areas, including strategies for SWDs and ENLs. Lesson plan content, methodology and delivery are adapted to meet the needs of SWDs, ENLs and students in general education setting. Strategies such as direct/explicit instruction, strategy instruction, metacognitive strategies, graphic organizers and journal writing, as well as the development of critical thinking skills and differentiation, are used to ensure that there is rigor and relevance in learning. There is evidence that the curriculum, instruction, assessments, instructional resources, technology applications, materials and interventions are aligned with State Learning Standards and the Common Core 2018-19 CEP 50  Learning standards for ELA, literacy and mathematics and performance indicators (with particular attention to the needs of subgroups) as applicable. School leaders attend monthly conferences offered by the district office, as well as training sessions offered by BFSC and Central Office to remain current in fulfilling their leadership roles. They also continue growing in their professions through literature and webinars that broaden their perspectives on education. All other staff members receive ongoing PD, including the paraprofessionals, in Casel Social-Emotional Learning, FBA and BIP developments, Intervention programs such as Wilson, Great Leaps, among others. This is important to the school community since our core belief is we cannot educate the mind without educating the heart. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The M.S. 151 MOSL Committee meets on multiple occasions and reviews the data from the previous year’s MOSL assessment results, and conduct conversations around the different options given to the schools. The committee weighs the benefits of selecting the options that are suitable for the school. Recommendations are then made and forwarded to the Principal for final approval. 2018-19 CEP 51  The M.S. 151 Staff Development Committee meets monthly with the Data Specialist to make decisions in planning the PD for the staff on data analysis (baseline and benchmark assessments) and use of EngradePro, iReady, SchoolNet and other tools to determine the content area skills and strategies that should be reinforced or re-taught with struggling students, and how instructional groups should be determined. The Data Specialist provides ongoing training to individual teachers aside from the whole staff training that is conducted to increase the staff’s understanding on the use of data tools and outcomes to drive instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 266,479.00 X Title II, Part A Federal 0 Title III, Part A Federal 12,366.00 N/A X 2018-19 CEP 52 Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A - Rigorous Instruction, Section 5B - Supportive Environment, Section 5C - Collaborative Teachers, Section 5D - Effective School Leadership, Section 5E - Strong Family and Community Ties N/A Section 5A - Rigorous Instruction, Section 5B - Supportive Environment, Section 5C - Collaborative Teachers, Section 5D - Effective School Leadership, Section  Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 N/A Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,271,101.00 X 5E - Strong Family and Community Ties N/A Section 5A - Rigorous Instruction, Section 5B - Supportive Environment, Section 5C - Collaborative Teachers, Section 5D - Effective School Leadership, Section 5E - Strong Family and Community Ties 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 CEP 53   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 54  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Middle School 151 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Middle School 151 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students > providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology, such as Parent School Account usage, study habits, homework monitoring, etc.; > providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children, such as Skedula and SchoolNet; > fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; > providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; > sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 55  > providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; > providing parents with reasonable access to staff, exclusive of the Tuesday mandated 40-minute mandate for parent outreach; > involving parents in policy-making decisions; > offering ESL, computer and financial literacy, arts & crafts, etc., classes; and, > increasing the use of social media, email and written publications to expand outreach to parents. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 CEP 56  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference so that parents may understand the State's academic standards, assessments and how they can support their children in improving their academic achievement; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 CEP 57  School-Parent Compact (SPC) 07X151 School-Parent Compact (SPC) Middle School 151, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: - using academic learning time efficiently; - respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; - implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; - offering high quality instruction in all content areas, as evidenced by instructional plans that are based on an analysis of student performance, with priority on serving students in their areas of greatest need; - providing instruction by highly qualified teachers who are effective/highly effective as measured by the Danielson rubric; - providing professional development sessions for instructional implementation of curricula that will facilitate use of resources and materials, including software, manipulative and hands-on materials, textbooks and workbooks; - providing common planning time for teachers to adjust/modify curriculum maps, create unit and lesson plans, analyze student work, interpret student data, etc.; - implementing the integration/infusion of technology into instruction, as well as the integration/application of literacy strategies during content area instruction. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 2018-19 CEP 58  ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: 2018-19 CEP 59  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 60  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 61  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 62  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Lou Gehrig Academy has a student body of 266. Thirty- four (35%) percent of our school’s population is composed of students in the English as a New Language population (93 in all). Of the 34% that comprises this population, 57 are on the entering level, 12 students require special education services, 11 are Long Term ENL students, and 4 are students with interrupted formal education (SIFE). Our distinct population requires a supplemental program that complements the transitional bilingual instructional model used throughout the school day. Our supplemental After-School program will be conducted every Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday from 3:00 to 4:00 P.M., all in all 45 sessions, from October 2018 to May 2019. Our 6-8th grade students will be grouped by language proficiency levels, not grade levels. These levels are determined with data supported by the 2018 NYSESLAT, 2018 ELA state assessment results, running records, ENL Periodic Assessment (NYC BOY, MOY & EOY exams) outcome, and formative assessments. One ESL and one Bilingual licensed teachers will provide instruction for our entering/emerging and transitioning students, and a teacher (with Common Branch license) and an ESL teacher will team-teach to work with our long term ELLs who have shown little or no improvement. There are 3 groups in this program: the first group consists of 24 students on the entering and emerging level, and is team-taught by a licensed Common Branch teacher & a licensed Bilingual Ed. teacher, the second group consists of 18 students on the transitioning level, and is taught by a licensed Bilingual Ed. teacher; and, the third group consists of 18 students who are long term ELLs (expanding level) who have shown little or no improvement, and is taught by a licensed ESL teacher. Instruction will be conducted in English with native language support, largely in Spanish. Students whose native language is not Spanish will receive instruction in English, and native language support will be provided through online translation tools, such as Google translate, and other instructional resources, such as dictionaries and glossaries. Start Date: October 1, 2018 End Date: May 30, 2019 # of students to participate: 60 -20 Entering & Emerging (of which 5 are SIFE) -18 Transitioning (of which 3 are SIFE) -22 Long term (Expanding) ENLs with 6+ years who have shown little improvement Length of each session: Tuesday - Thursday, 3:00 - 4:00 P.M. The Entering to Transitioning program will include the following research based components for effective language acquisition instruction: We will offer supplemental Saturday School Program, in which 50 students will be enrolled --- 24 students in 8th grade, 11 in 7th and 15 in 6th grade. It begins at 9:00 a.m. and ends at 12:00. Out of 50 ENL students who will participate in this program, 10 of them are long term ENL students, 16 are entering and emerging, 9 are transitioning, and 15 are expanding. Just like our After-School program, students will be grouped by language proficiency levels, not grade levels, and their levels will be determined with data supported by 2017 NYSESLAT and 2017 ELA State Exam results, Lexile Levels, ENL Periodic Assessments (NYC BOY, MOY & EOY Exams) and formative assessments. One ESL licensed teacher will provide instruction for our entering and 2018-19 CEP 63  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information emerging group, and a teacher with Bilingual/Special Education license will work with the transitioning group. A licensed common branch/bilingual teacher will be working with the expanding group. Students will receive instruction in all strands of second language learning, namely speaking, listening, reading and writing. Please see schedule below. Entering/Emerging Transitioning Expanding/Long Term ENLs Teacher 1 Teacher 2 Teacher 3 1st Period 2nd Period 3rd Period 2nd Period 3rd Period 1st Period 3rd Period 1st Period 2nd Period Language of instruction will be conducted in English with native language support, largely Spanish. Students whose native language is not Spanish will receive instruction in English, and native language support will be provided through online translation tools such as Google translate, and other instructional resources, such as dictionaries and glossaries. Start Date: February 2, 2019 End Date: May 25, 2019 # of Teachers: 3 # of Students: 50 - 10 Long Term Ells (4 SIFE) - 16 Entering/Emerging (3 SIFE) - 11 Transitioning (2 SIFE) -13 Expanding (7 SIFE) Components of Supplemental Program: 1. Screen and monitor student progress with the use of individual learning plans. 2. Explicit instruction of reading skills: -phonemic/phonetic awareness -letter/word recognition -text fluency -vocabulary -reading comprehension 3. Language Practice: -oral drills -oral reading 4. Teacher feedback through frequent 1:1 conferring sessions Rationale for each component: 1. We will use formative assessments to focus on individual student needs. Formative assessments will be used to drive classroom and individual instruction, provide peer learning groupings, and to set learning goals. 2. Research on successful reading programs for ENLs has determined that these components are essential for accelerated language development. Language instruction for our middle school students is limited by time as we have our students for only three years. Therefore, it is critical that through our after-school program, we are able to target each of the components for language development in a small group setting. 3. Providing ample opportunities for language practice is essential for language development; as such, teachers will implement multiple pathways in improving the students' language skills. Students need to be part of a learning community in which they feel comfortable in using social and academic oral language and growing as English language readers. Our program will provide these opportunities in a warm and inviting learning atmosphere where students practice language while having fun! 2018-19 CEP 64  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 4. Frequent and immediate teacher feedback will be used for setting and meeting goals. Students should be able to clearly identify their areas of deficiency and strength in order for them to gain ownership of their own learning. With the teacher's guidance/assistance/support, students will use strategies in improving their language skills development. Activities: -Monthly (After-School) and weekly (Saturday School Program) formative assessments or as needed on phonemic/phonetic awareness, letter/word recognition, mastery of sight words, reading fluency. The goal is to monitor early literacy skill development and oral fluency. -Explicit instruction on phonemic/phonetic awareness. -Use of drill and practice to build mastery of letters and sight words. Explicit teaching of word patterns, phonemic blends, word parts, semantic clues, picture cues, word structure, etc. -Building of text fluency through Reader’s Theater. Students will choose a play to work on and perform for an audience as a project celebration. Oral fluency will be monitored frequently by administering running records. -Social and academy vocabulary development. -Explicit instruction of reading comprehension skills and strategies. 3. For oral language practice: - Playing games such as charades, apple to apples, Taboo Junior, etc. - Using audio scripts for modeling oral language For reading language practice: - reading short stories using the guided reading model and other reading strategies -Teen Biz, NewsELA, Accelerated Reader, Time magazine, Lightsail software, ReadTheory -administration of running records, Read Works 4. One- to-one conferences, focusing on all language development strands Materials: 1. Individual learner profiles using teacher designed templates to be available online through EngradePro 2. Smart board, projector, laptops, mini ipads, tablets, microphones, tape recorders 3. Software - Brain Pop, Newsela, Discovery Learning, Word Generation, Boardworks, ReadTheory 4. Phonics cards, audio scripts 5. Fountas & Pinnell Reading running record assessments kits 6. Fluency scripts, plays, group sets of play to perform 7. Workbooks, worksheets and activity handouts (formative assessments), variety of graphic organizers 8. Various games - Word Zap, Scrabble (English and Spanish), Words with Friends 9. Conference binders and post-its for conferencing and feedback sessions Long Term ENL students: This program is designed to build test sophistication skills. We will use the Continental New York NYSESLAT practice test materials in reinforcing and practicing test strategies. We will incorporate fun videos, reading comprehension and writing games, and use the following technology-based programs --- Rosetta Stone, Newsela, Boardworks, Brain Pop, ReadTheory, Discovery, News ELA, CNN students news, among others. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 65  Part C: Professional Development  name of provider Begin description here: In order to provide training to all of our ESL/Bilingual teachers, we allow teachers to attend PD sessions offered by the Bronx Field Support Center at no cost to Title III (usually offered through the Professional Learning website and/or email from BFSC instructional support staff ) and Fordham University, as well as NYC Professional Development Management System for courses on ENL & ENL students with special needs. We then require teachers to turnkey during the 80 minute-PD on Mondays or the Teacher Team meeting during the mandated 35-minute professional activity. In addition, we have several professional development opportunities for all staff members, and these PDs provide instructional strategies/best practices for addressing the needs of our ENL students, including those classified as having special needs. We also have an Inquiry Team that meets biweekly, with focus on the academic vocabulary development of ENL students using Word Generation. Increased training is planned on using online learning tools to monitor progress and set up teacher websites for individualized instruction. Aside from what will be offered by the BFSC, the following PDs will be provided to the staff, all of which will be conducted/facilitated by consultants (at no cost to Title III in keeping with SAM Chapter 31 guidelines), the administrators and/or teachers @ M.S. 151: September: 9/17/18(2:40 -4:00 P.M.) - Data Analysis/Skedula Access - Asst. Principal Lett; 9/26/16 (2:40-4:00 P.M.) - Revisiting EngradePro/SchoolNet - Ms. Estronza & Ms. Oehl October: 10/15/18 (2:40 P.M. - 4:00 P.M.) - Item Analysis Tool for Planning Instruction - Principal Rivera; 10/24/16 (2:40 P.M. - 4:00 P.M.)- Teaching ENL Students with Special Ed. Classification - Ms. Feliz; 10/31/16 (2:40 - 4:00 P.M.) - Personalized Learning Plans - Ms. Houghton November: 11/12/18 (2:40 - 4:00 P.M.) Explicit Learning Targets - Asst. Principal Lett; 11/8/16 (1:00 - 2:00 P.M.) - Parent Engagement (ENL community of learners) - Ms. Pacheco; 11/14/16 - Collaborative Team Essentials (2:40 - 4:00 P.M.) - Ms. Oehl & Ms. Estronza; 11/21/16 (2:40 - 4:00 P.M.) Overview of the Stages of Second Language Acquisition - Principal Rivera; 11/28/16 (2:40 - 4:00 P.M.) - Transitional Bilingual Education Program Components and Instruction - Ms. Aung & Ms. Francisco For December 2018 through June 2019, the following PD sessions are planned: December 3, 2018: Teaching Vocabulary to ENL Students January 7, 2019: SIOP - Differentiating Instruction for English Language Proficiency Levels February 11: Classroom Instruction that Works for ENL Students March 11: Leading Student Centered Discussion in the Age of Common Core April 15: Rigor through Support: Curriculum, Pedagogy and Assessment with ENL Students May 13: Universal Design for Learning (Adaptations vs. Modifications) June 3: Reflective Practice in Improving Instruction of ENL Students Other topics for professional conversations may include, but not limited to: - Teaching Phonics (for teachers of Beginning ENL students) - Making Meaning through Pictures (for teachers of Beginning ENL students) - Lesson/Unit planning using Understanding By Design framework - Explicit Content Language in Lesson Planning - Developing formative assessments and analyzing student work - Learning to Learn In a Second Language Setting 2018-19 CEP 66  Part C: Professional Development - Socratic Seminars for High-Level Thinking - Vocabulary: The Road to Reading Comprehension - ELLs Inquiry Team: Analysis of Student Work for Language Development through Findings and Research. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of all ENL students participating in our Title III program will receive training on the software available for ENL instruction so that they are able to work with their children on building English language skills. They will be allowed to use the school’s Media Center/Lab to receive training while their children are attending the after-school and/or Saturday programs. They will also receive training in using SchoolNet, iReady and EngradePro to monitor their children's progress, and identify areas on which they can assist and support their children in the learning process. Invitation to the training sessions will be done by our Parent Coordinator through School Instant Messenger, parent meetings, letter and/or phone calls. What follows is the list of parent workshops to be offered to parents of ENL students, with the support of the Bronx Field Support Center's ENL specialists (at no cost to Title III), District Family Advocate, administrators, teaching staff and Parent Coordinator: October 2018 - 10:00 to 11:00 A.M. - (1) Parents as Leaders - Principal Rivera - (2) Child Bullying and Cyberbullying - Single Shepherd counselors November 2018- 2:30 to 3:30 P.M. - (1) EngradePro Access (Monitoring Child's Progress) - Ms. Rosario, PC - (2) Skedula/SchoolNet (Monitoring Child's Progress) - Asst. Principal Reyes - (3) What is Parental Support? - Ms. Rosario, PC December 2018 - 10:00 to 11:00 A.M. - (1) Domestic Violence - NYS Office for Prevention of Domestic Violence - 9:00 to 10:00 A.M. - (2) Camps for Enrichment - Fresh Air Fund January 2019 - 10:00 to 11:00 A.M. - Nutrition Workshop - Department of Health February 2019 - 5:00 to 6:00 P.M. - Emergency Preparedness - American Red Cross March 2019 - 10:00 to 11:00 A.M. - Testing and Test Procedures Workshop - School Test Coordinator April 2019 - 10:00 to 11:00 A.M. - Effective Communication - District Attorney's Office Staff Parents will participate in a series of "Get To Know" sessions (4:30 -5:15 P.M. the first Monday of each month), in which they will explore high stakes exams, Common Core Standards, Second Language Acquisition/Learning web sites. These sessions will be conducted by the Principal or Asst. Principal and ESL teachers, Ms. Rosa and Ms. Francisco, during after school hours. 2018-19 CEP 67 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Parents will also participate in the Urban Advantage and Lincoln Center AIM parent workshops, which include trips for participants and their families. For the enhancement of the environment, parents of ENL students will be offered to participate in the NEAT (Neighborhood Environmental Action Team), a city-funded program. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $12,366 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 68  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name Lou Gehrig Academy Borough Bronx School Number 151 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Socorro Rivera Coach Pamela Meyers ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Estelle Francisco Teacher/Subject Area Roanmy Feliz Teacher/Subject Area Erica Rosa Related-Service Provider Megan Kaval Superintendent Rafael Alvarez Assistant Principal Jason Reyes Coach Crystal Salisbury School Counselor Dayanna Carrion Parent Pedro Guillen Parent Coordinator Carmen Rosario Field Support Center Staff Member Socorro Diaz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 234 2018-19 CEP 69 Total number of ELLs 75 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 32.05%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish, Arabic, Soninke If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2018-19 2018-19 2018-19 K 1 4 3 2 Lang. Spanish Arabic Soninke Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 1 1 1 3 7 1 1 1 3 8 1 1 1 3 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 3 3 0 0 0 9 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers use Fountas & Pinnell, along with teacher-created assessments and classroom/school-wide writing performance tasks, to identify ELLs' reading levels. The outcomes of these assessments are used to guide instructional planning for ELLs. Reading and writing conferences are logged in order to plan effectively the scaffolds needed by ELLs in language development. Results of these assessments are analyzed and used to check and adjust pedagogy and content in order to increase student performance. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Common planning meetings are scheduled weekly for the teachers to meet and analyze student work to identify strengths and weaknesses of the ELLs, focusing on the reading and writing skills. Speaking and listening activities are embedded into the lessons in order to practice these skills on a day-to-day basis. 2018-19 CEP 70  The participating teachers in the ELL Inquiry Team meet on a weekly basis in order to discuss research related to the learning challenges of the ELL population, identify classroom- and school-level strategies that are supported by research, find links to New York State performance indicators aligned to a particular learning challenge, analyze student work & other assessment outcomes, and use tools to scaffold the team's dialogue and decision-making. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To identify baseline, progress and areas of needs for ELLs, we use the HLA Assessment, NYS ELA Assessment, ELL Periodic Assessments, NYC performance tasks, and NYSESLAT results. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Common planning meetings are scheduled weekly for the teachers to meet and analyze student work to identify strengths and weaknesses of the ELLs, focusing on the reading and writing skills. Speaking and listening activities are embedded into the lessons in order to practice these skills on a day-to-day basis. After-school and Saturday school programs are offered to ENLs for enrichment and reinforcement of skills, and these programs are designed in such a way that the different language development needs of the students are addressed. The participating teachers in the ELL Inquiry Team meet on a weekly basis in order to discuss research related to the learning challenges of the ELL population, identify classroom- and school-level strategies that are supported by research, find links to New York State performance indicators aligned to a particular learning challenge, analyze student work & other assessment outcomes, and use tools to scaffold the team's dialogue and decision-making. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] For grades 6-8, for every ENL who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment, we determine the additional support services to provide the student, taking into consideration the following: number of years of instruction in a bilingual education or English as a new language program, English and home language literacy, content area and socio-emotional support needs of students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE), English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELLs, results on the annual English language proficiency assessment exam, bilingual education or English as a second language teacher recommendation, content area teacher recommendation, parent or guardian request, sample of student work in English and the home language, and bilingual educational evaluation if student has or is suspected of having a disability. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data Patterns Across Proficiency Levels NYSESLAT 2018 Grade 6 On Listening-Speaking-Reading-Writing sections: The majority of six grade students achieved beginning level (53%) 0% performed at the proficient level. 4% performed at the advanced level. 40% performed at the intermediate level. 56% performed at the beginning level. Grade 7 On Listening-Speaking-Reading-Writing section: 2018-19 CEP 71  The majority of seventh grade students achieved advanced level (52%) 0% performed at the proficient level. 38% performed at the advanced level. 6% performed at the intermediate level. 56% performed at the beginning level. Grade 8 On Listening-Speaking-Reading-Writing section: The majority of eight grade students achieved beginning level (38%) 0% performed at the proficient level. 37% performed at the advanced level. 21% performed at the intermediate level. 42% performed at the beginning level. An analysis of the specific sub-sections of the NYSESLAT scores for 2017 indicates that reading and writing will continue to be the areas of focus for ESL and Bilingual instruction. Across all grades, student performed significantly less in these two sub-sections. LAB-R/NYSITELL Exam Patterns: Grade 6 The majority of six grade students achieved beginning level (84%). 0% performed at proficient level. 16% performed at advanced level. 0% performed at intermediate level. 84% performed at beginning level. Grade 7 The majority of seventh grade students achieved beginning level (91%) 0% performed at proficient level. 9% performed at advance level. 0% performed at intermediate level. 91% performed at beginning level. Grade 8 The majority of eight grade students achieved beginning (91%) 3% performed at advanced level. 6% performed at intermediate level. 91% performed at beginning level. An analysis of grade 6, 7 & 8 LAB-R/NYSITELL current scores indicate that the majority of the students performed at the beginning level, and as they progressed through the Bilingual program, the had made insufficient progress. NYSESLAT scores, as shown above, are evidence of performance in sub-sections reading and writing. Literacy interventions and strategies, which include research-based technology programs, will be used to support and enhance 2018-19 CEP 72  literacy development of ELLs. Reinforcement lessons in the after school programs will include all language learning strands to strengthen speaking, listening, reading and writing skills. Teachers will differentiate instruction using the curriculum framework with focus on reading and writing: developing instruction and implemented practices that facilitate the learning of key reading sub-skills and learning targets (e.g., phonetic & phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension), and key writing sub-skills and learning targets (e.g., meaning, development, organization, language use and mechanics). Adaptations to teaching ELLs will be applied to instruction, such as using translated texts, implementing peer coaching (advanced/proficient ELL to buddy up with entering/emerging ELLs), using graphic organizers to scaffold learning, incorporating games (scrabble, Word Zap, Words with Friends, etc.) into the lessons, among others. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our school leadership has assembled an ELL Inquiry Team in order to improve outcomes for at-risk ELL students. The team is charged with the task of analyzing data derived from the RLAT and other tools, identifying a focus/problem of practice, select students for case studies, target a specific area of need, design and implement a plan of support, monitor, assess and evaluate so as to make changes across the entire ELL population. In language development, a child needs a great deal of scaffolding through various strategies to assist in the acceleration of learning the second language. Resources and materials used for instruction should be appropriate for the proficiency levels of the students in class, allowing the teachers to differentiate the activities or tasks for the students. Monitoring and evaluation --- i.e. participating in the common planning meetings, reviewing lesson plans, reviewing assessment data, among others --- is a process employed so as to ensure that the requirements in the 2nd language development is met and implemented. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The school provides one of two models for the ELL population. Freestanding ESL model is one of the organizational models we use at Lou Gehrig Academy, in which students receive instruction in special education or general education setting three periods (135 minutes) of ESL support per week. ESL instruction is delivered to heterogeneous groups of 6th, 7th and 8th grade students. Differentiation of instruction is used to address the language proficiencies of all students at their appropriate levels. The ESL teachers also provide push-in and/or pull-out to ELL students in mainstream classroom. b. TBE program. If applicable. Currently, M.S. 151 provides 2 language models --- Transitional Bilingual and Free-Standing ESL program. Transitional Bilingual classes are grouped heterogeneously for math, science, social studies, art, Phys. Ed./Health Ed. and NLA. ESL teachers push-in 80% of the instructional time in social studies and Native Language arts. During the literacy block, each grade is grouped homogeneously based on language and academic proficiency. Each of our ESL teachers works with a smaller group to deliver more tailored instruction: Group 1 - Beginner/Entering and Low Intermediate/Emerging, Group 2 - Intermediate/Transitioning, Advanced/Expanding, and Proficient/Commanding. Our TBE classes work with the ESL teacher during the literacy block for 180 minutes a day. In all the other courses, this 2018-19 CEP 73  is the model that we implement: Entering/Emerging: 1 unit using NL with ESL support and Transitioning/Expanding: 1 unit using ESL with NL support. Bilingual teachers conduct lessons in both Spanish and English for Native Language Arts, math, science and social studies. TBE in bilingual instruction is delivered to heterogeneous groups of students across all grades. Students' level of language development is further enhanced through differentiation of instruction within the classroom. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The TBE program is in self-contained setting for both ELA and ESL. The monolingual students receive ESL services depending on the proficiency levels based on the NYSESLAT results (totaling 360 minutes for Beginner/Entering, 360 minutes for Low Intermediate/Emerging, 180 minutes for Intermediate/Transitioning, 180 minutes for Advanced/Expanding and 90 minutes for Proficient/Commanding. Bilingual students receive 9 periods of ESL per week totaling 405 minutes. ELLs receive 5 periods of instruction in ENL totaling 225 minutes. The Transitional Bilingual Program (Spanish/English) is based on our students' levels of English language and academic proficiency, and the instructional minutes delivered in each program model consist of 5 periods (equivalent to 225 minutes) in ENL/ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The TBE program is in self-contained setting for both ELA and ESL. The monolingual students receive ESL services depending on the proficiency levels based on the NYSESLAT results (totaling 360 minutes for beginner/entering, 360 minutes for low intermediate/emerging, 180 minutes for intermediate/transitioning, 180 minutes for advanced)/expanding and 90 minutes for proficient/commanding. Bilingual students receive 10 periods a week totaling 450 minutes. ELLs receive 4 periods of instruction in NLA weekly, totaling 180 minutes. ELLs receive instruction in other core subjects (Science-225 minutes, Math-360 minutes and Social Studies-225 minutes) by licensed bilingual teachers. TBE and ESL teachers use the following core content in those programs: Code Ex, NewsELA, ReadTheory and Boardworks are used as part of the ENL/ELA and ESL content program. EngradePro, an online, assessment/grade management system, is used to provide students and parents with immediate access to grades and performance needs so that there is increased transparency among students, teachers and parents. ESL teachers push-in 80% (180 minutes) of the program time in ENL/ELA and Social Studies. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking ELLs are assessed in their native language using the Spanish Lab exam (NYSITELL). ELLs take other assessments to measure pre-post growth, e.g., Measure of Student Learning assessments (NYC), core curriculum assessments (Go Math) and teacher generated standards-based tests. Bilingual and ESL teachers assess ELLs over the cross of five instructional periods during the year. Teachers use a blend of teacher generated standards-based tests and core curriculum assessments as well as writing assessments across all subject areas. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 74  a. We currently have 4 SIFE students. For ELLs under this category, we conduct small group instruction in order to harness literacy skills in both their native language and English. Technology/media based lessons are provided, along with software (NewsELA, ReadTheory, etc.) that highly supports them in the language learning process. Dictionaries and glossaries are used as reference for daily instruction. We encourage regular school attendance, and we highly recommend after-school programs and Saturday Academy. b. We currently have 42 newcomers, and for these ELLs we use leveled assessments to examine data in order to determine the proficiency levels of all students in this category. Based on data, students are grouped heterogeneously or homogeneously depending on target skills or strategies. Extensive vocabulary instruction, particularly academic vocabulary (Marzano's theory), is incorporated in the daily lessons. Teacher-directed instruction (with increased scaffolding) that transitions to student-centered instruction is implemented in the classroom, such as read-aloud/think-aloud, shared and guided reading, use of literacy centers/stations that focus on grammar, phonetic and phonemic awareness and recognition, listening and speaking. Dictionaries and glossaries are used as reference for daily instruction. Technology hardware and software are used as tools to supplement instruction. We highly recommend after-school programs and Saturday Academy. c. We currently have 12 ELLs receiving service 4-6 years. We use the NYSESLAT and the NYS ELA assessment outcomes to support content area teachers in designing lessons. Homogeneous small group instruction based on targeted skills and strategies is implemented. Technology hardware and software are used as tools to supplement instruction. Dictionaries and glossaries are used as reference for daily instruction. We highly recommend after-school programs and Saturday Academy. d. We currently have 11 long-term ELLs. We provide individualized instruction in English using the pull-out model. Concentration is on the development of reading and writing, as well as test taking strategies that they can use for the NYSESLAT. Technology hardware and software are used as tools to supplement instruction. Dictionaries and glossaries are used as reference for daily instruction. We highly recommend after-school programs, as well as Saturday Academy. e. We currently have 7 students who are ELLs in a self-contained Special Education classes. These students receive push-in ESL instruction 3 times per week through small group instruction based on identified learning needs. Bilingual Special Education students receive 10 periods of self-contained ELA/ESL instruction and 5 periods of SETSS. Technology hardware and software are used as tools to supplement instruction. Dictionaries and glossaries are used as reference for daily instruction. We highly recommend after-school programs, as well as Saturday Academy. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Content area resources and materials appropriate for each grade level are modified for each child's instructional level. ELLs receive support in vocabulary instruction (most importantly academic vocabulary) in order to develop their own strategies for reading comprehension. ESL teachers push in to the classrooms or pull out students in order to provide reinforcement in deeper understanding of grade-level material, offering extensive support in vocabulary development/building, reinforcing the use of correct grammar in speaking and writing, and building reading & writing skills. Classroom teachers have dictionaries and glossaries in their libraries that are available to all students. It has become a practice in our school to translate content area material into Spanish in order for parents to assist their children at home. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs and Students With Disabilities have very diverse learning needs. We use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the needs of these learners. All students are assessed to determine their instructional levels in specific subject areas. For 6 years now, we have tried to implement the push-in model as opposed to pull-out. The push-in model allows the teacher to work inside the classroom, alongside the subject area teacher, rather than place the students in a more restrictive pull-out class. The push-in model allows the teacher to support the students with the curriculum material, offering ESL strategies that will lead students to independence when working with grade-level content. The ESL teacher's schedule is designed on the basis of the students' schedules and needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 75  The following intervention programs are used at M.S. 151 to support our ELL population in each content area, namely: ELA: Great Leaps, Words their Way, Push-in/Pull-out ESL instruction, Peer Pairing, reinforcement of reading skills in native language during NLA period, level centered activities focusing on phonetic/phonemic awareness, vocabulary enrichment and writing conventions (NY Edits), technology-based programs (e.g. NewsELA, BrainPop, ReadTheory), quick-writes/journal writing, conferencing, guided /strategic reading. For SWDs, we use all of the above at appropriate level, and the curriculum is modified in order to adapt to ELL needs. For SIFE, we implement all of the above with additional support during the after school program and Saturday Academy. MATH: Sheltered Model of Instruction, push-in for our intermediate/transitioning and advanced/expanding students, use of dictionaries & glossaries, translations of text, a large amount of native language support, peer pairing, conferencing, journal writing, tech-based programs. For SWDs, we implement all of the above at appropriate skill level. For SIFE, we implement all of the above with additional support during after school program and Saturday Academy. SOCIAL STUDIES: Sheltered Model of Instruction, push-in for intermediate and advanced students, dictionaries & glossaries, translations of texts, a large amount of native language support, peer pairing, conferencing, journal writing, tech-based programs (NewsELA, ReadTheory and BrainPop). For SWDs, we implement all of the above at appropriate skill level. For SIFE, we implement all of the above. SCIENCE: Sheltered Model of Instruction, push-in for intermediate/advanced students, dictionaries & glossaries, translations of texts, a large amount of native language support, peer pairing, conferencing, journal writing, tech-based programs (NewsELA, ReadTheory and BrainPop). For SWDs, we implement all of the above at appropriate skill level. For SIFE, we implement all of the above. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we will consider the following programs or improvements: block-scheduling that will allow for small homogeneously grouped students based on competency levels, increased professional development on SIOP and other pedagogical practices that enhance the teaching of ELLs, increased periods for AIS or RtI (intervention programs) for struggling ELLs, increased resources and materials to supplement ELL instruction, e.g. leveled Spanish libraries, running records in Spanish, Spanish magazines and books, test prep materials, videos in represented languages, among others. There is no significant increase in the achievement of ELLs in the ELA and NYSESLAT; therefore, additional improvements need to take in effect for intervention and reinforcement of language acquisition skills, as well as increased practice in using tools and applying strategies to impact language learning and development. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? To improve ELL instruction at M.S. 151, we have to work more creatively on scheduling and programming so that we can group the students according to accurate proficiency levels. Also, we have to choose the appropriate intervention strategies for each of our ELLs in order to accurately address deficiencies and barriers in the language learning process. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All after-school programs are open to all ELLs. They have equal access to after-school academic programs, in which they are grouped according to grade and proficiency levels. This is also the same model for our Saturday Program. Sports & Arts in Schools Foundation Program (CBO/SES after-school) offers both curricular and extra-curricular activities. The parent coordinator presents and explains to parents various opportunities offered during "Meet the Teachers Night", and she follows it up through sending letters in both English & Spanish, reminding them to enrol their child(ren) in the program. An ESL teacher is assigned to teach the class from Tuesday to Friday. The first period is designed for all the entering ELLs and the second period is for all the emerging ELLs as well as expanding ELLs. SASF also offers cheerleading, Art, soccer, basketball, drama, dance, music, etc., for all the students, including the ELL population. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following instructional materials are used in supporting our ELLs: NewsELA (translated texts in Spanish), vocabulary reinforcement and enrichment, audio guides (can be accessed at home), ReadTheory (English language --- can be accessed at 2018-19 CEP 76  home), dictionaries/glossaries, online translation tools, test practice materials, books on tape, Time Magazine for Kids, Weekly Reader, EVC digital lessons, Discovery, and iLearn platforms. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered through the implementation of sheltered instruction in all content areas. For beginners, the push-in pull-out model supports the acceleration of language development. Language support materials and resources are used extensively, such as glossaries and dictionaries, iGoogle translate via the Internet (accessed on laptops), peer pairing, print-rich classroom environment (where everything is labeled in both Spanish and English), NLA, Spanish trade books for science & social studies, novels in Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At M.S. 151 the required support services of ESL and NLA are in compliance with the CR Part 154. Most of our resources are available to students in their native language, predominantly in Spanish. NewsELA is a technology-based program, in which students receive tailored reading instruction using non-fiction texts in both Spanish and English. We also have a great deal of language support in Social Studies and Science in the form of audio CDs, DVDs, photographs and translated texts. We use the TIME Magazine Program in both English and Spanish, proven to be highly effective in language acquisition. In mathematics, aside from the availability of the translated text, we have purchased supplemental materials to support our ELLs in different language development levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The ELLs at M.S. 151 are included in all school activities that involve academic, linguistic and socio-emotional development. Teachers in all co-location schools are able to interact and communicate formally (training sessions and workshops) and informally (daily conversations), exchanging ideas in making learning for the ELLs meaningful. Teachers plan games, e.g. basketball, and parties, e.g. Fall Harvest Dance, among the ELLs in the co-location schools. The following instructional materials used in supporting our ELLs are shared with the co-location schools: NewsELA (translated texts in Spanish, vocabulary reinforcement and enrichment, audio guides --- can be accessed at home), ReadTheory (English language --- can be accessed at home), dictionaries/glossaries, online translation tools, test practice materials, books on tape, Time Magazine for Kids, Weekly Reader, EVC digital lessons, Discovery, iLearn platforms. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The pupil/payroll secretary is in charge in registering the newly enrolled ELL, and she gives the parent the MLIS to fill out. The ESL teacher tests the student the NYSITELL (LAB-R for Spanish speaking student). The video is shown to the parent by the Parent Coordinator while the student is being tested. Then the ESL teacher gives the program selection form. The guidance counselor interviews the newly enrolled ELL. Newly enrolled ELLs are assigned a school buddy who tours them around the school and introduces them to our staff. They also give them orientation on the school's standard operating procedures and non-negotiables. For a week or so, the school buddy works with the newcomer who needs to get acclimated to or assimilated with his/her new environment or community. Our bilingual guidance counselor meets with the students to help them transition to American culture in order to prevent "cultural shock" among these newcomers. This fosters a harmonious atmosphere/relationship in order for the newcomer to be comfortable in asking questions and sharing concerns. The administrators invite newly arrived students to have lunch with them so that they may feel warmly welcomed in their new "home" in NYC. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer a number of language electives through Rosetta Stone. Students are also exposed to French and sign language as part of the SASF after-school program. The Drama Club is also offered this year to allow increased practice in English by ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 CEP 77  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers of ELLs meet for one common planning period per week, and in these meetings they share ELL best instructional practices, discuss individual student/group level/whole class progress, look at/examine/analyze student work, and plan for instruction (interdisciplinary, cross-curricular, differentiated, personalized mastery learning, etc.). Throughout the year, ELL teachers (including non-ELL teachers) are sent to various workshops offered by the NYC DOE for English Language Learners, the Borough Field Office ELL support team or universities (e.g. Fordham University) and consulting agencies. Teachers then turn key professional development sessions to all school personnel, including guidance counselors and service-related providers as part of our weekly professional activity (as mandated by NYC DOE). Every Monday throughout the year, PD is offered to ELL teachers during the 90-minute mandated sessions. PD sessions that pertain to language learning instructional strategies are held where all teachers are invited to participate since there are always ELLs in every classroom in the school. AP, related services personnel, guidance counselors, Sp. Ed. teachers, secretary and parent coordinator may be invited to attend the ELL PD workshops. All teachers of ELLs are required to participate in inter-visitations with ESL teachers to observe best practices in language development instruction. Our Professional Learning Team (ELL) conducts book studies, e.g. Gibbons' Learning to Learn in a Second Language (Chapters 3 and 7 specifically), and sharing of professional literature about ELL instruction. Classroom teachers are directed to take online ELL PD webinars offered through the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support, Office of English language Learners, Education Week, SchoolNet and ADVANCE, among others. Onsite training pertaining to MOSL and ELL Periodic Assessments is also encouraged. Teachers of ELLs (who practically are all of the teachers @ MS. 151) are provided with professional development that focuses on various areas of instruction, such as the development of an ILDP (Individualized Language Development Plan) for each students, how to assess ELLs' current levels of academic performance, how to identify ELLs' strengths and weaknesses using item analysis, development of short- and long-term goals, etc. Instructional shifts will also be reviewed so that the teachers are able to plan and prepare effective units of study. Knowledge of each ELL in the classroom enables the teachers to address the appropriate strategies, approaches and methodologies that are applicable to instruction, which they will align to the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers will receive training in the effective use of scaffolding strategies in vocabulary and language development, guided interaction, metacognition and authentic assessment, explicit instruction, meaning-based context and universal themes, modeling and use of graphic organizers & visuals. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 78  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. For our 8th grade ELLs, we provide a great deal of support to them and their parents as they transition to high school. Our bilingual guidance counselor works closely with 8th grade ELLs in their selection of high schools. The counselor reviews with each student his/her progress reports, exam history, interests and goals. Along with parents, high school choices are finalized. Throughout the school year, the grade advisor and counselor meet for one-to-one goal setting conferences where high school expectations and standards are the main topics for discussion. In addition, we provide several high school walkthroughs or visits during the school year to help the students familiarize themselves with the high school setting. All teachers participate in meetings devoted to ESL/ELL compliance issues, LAP review, and ELL/ESL best practices that are incorporated into every lesson. We meet for one hour monthly starting in November, with a specific focus: - September: LAP Toolkit and Review & CR Part 154 - group work, review, questions & answers, revisions - October: Language Learning Objectives/Goal Setting (Students) - November: Data Analysis of Our ELL Population - December: Guided Instruction - Scaffolding language and Scaffolding Learning - January: Mini-workshop/training on Accelerating Language Development (Harvard Study) - February: Best Practice: Explicit Direct Instruction - March: Best Practice: How do we provide native language support to our ELLs? (technology-based PD) - April: Best Practice: Testing ELLs as a Genre - Strategies to Increase Stamina - May: Best Practice: Distinguishing Language Acquisition from Learning Disabilities - June: Reflective Practice - What Works, What Doesn't; Preparing our ELLs for Summer (Reading Lists, Summer School, etc.) Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our Parent Coordinator plays the biggest role in implementing continued communication with parents of ELLs. Monthly workshops are offered to parents, the topics of which mostly pertain to language development and the learning needs of ELLs. We conduct quarterly meetings with parents and families of ELLs to discuss student progress geared towards language acquisition improvement in all content areas. Teachers and support staff regularly communicate with parents to update them on their child's progress. Progress reports via EngradePro are sent to parents so that they are kept abreast of their children's performance and progress in their classes. For parents who prefer language other than English, translation and interpretation services are provided, predominantly in Spanish and Arabic. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 1. At M.S. 151 our parents are afforded ample opportunities to work with administrators, teachers and other school personnel. Throughout the school year we host a variety of assemblies that include award ceremonies, student and professional performances (in which parents are strongly encouraged to attend). We also host several school-wide events that guarantee high attendance rate of ELL parents, such as: The Woman/Man I Admire Night @ Yolanda's (in which students are asked to bring a parent/guardian for an Italian dinner on us, paid by one of our supporters), Scholar Dollar Auctions, Triple Threat rewards, Fall Harvest Dance, Harvest Breakfast for Parents, Coffee and Cake with Parents of Honor Students, Holiday Potluck, Spring Dance, Learning Festival, Family Literacy Night, and Field Day. In addition, we have an open-door policy, in which parents are encouraged to visit the school as often as they like. 2018-19 CEP 79  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 80 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Socorro Rivera, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 81  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Lou Gehrig Academy School DBN: 07X151 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Socorro Rivera Title Principal Jason Reyes Assistant Principal Carmen Rosario Parent Coordinator Estelle Francisco ENL/Bilingual Teacher Pedro Guillen Parent Roanmy Feliz Teacher/Subject Area Erica Rosa Teacher/Subject Area Pamela Meyers Crystal Salisbury Coach Coach Gloria Carrasquilo School Counselor Richard Cintron Socorro Diaz Flavia Martinez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Service Provider Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 82  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X151 School Name: Lou GehrigAcademy Superintendent: Rafael Alvarez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Carmen Rosario Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. M.S. 151 uses the Home Language Identification Survey forms primarily to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Since English and Spanish are the predominant languages spoken by the families of our students, we provide fully bilingual services at the main office during registration. During the interview with parents, they are asked the following questions: (1) In what language would you like to receive written information from the school? (2) In what language would you prefer to communicate orally with school staff? A pedagogue administers the new admit the HLIS and a copy of the results is immediately provided to the ESL teacher. If the student's home language is other than English, all documentation that is sent home is translated into his/her language. Many of these letters are found on the samples published on the NYC DOE Office of ELLs website. Also, we have bilingual staff members who can serve as translators if and when needed. Parents who need translated copies of all school documents, e.g. Bill of Rights and Responsibilities (which includes the parents' 2018-19 CEP 83  rights regarding translation and interpretation services), Faculty Handbook, etc., are given hard copies of requested documents, or they are advised to access the documents online. The Student Emergency Contact cards, aka blue emergency cards, are filled out by the parents, and one information that is asked is "Parent's Preferred Language of Communication". RHLA and RMNR on ATS are also used as references/resources. The parent portion of the NYC School Survey allows the school to ask the parents whether they want to take the survey in English, Spanish or any other language in which the survey is available. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Soninke Arabic Afrikaans Bengali Mandinka French 131 160 3 6 1 3 2 1 42.67 52.12 0.98 1.95 0.33 0.98 0.65 0.33 132 159 3 6 1 3 2 1 43 51.79 0.98 1.95 0.33 0.98 0.65 0.33 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? - Parent/Student Handbook Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. - We use DOE Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-2018-19 CEP 84  - Parent-teacher conference announcements - Annually during the P-T conference in September based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages, if and when needed. - After school Information - September, November, March, May - Testing dates - October and January - Parent Workshops - September - Letters to parents on the website and newsletters, - Monthly (1st week) - SLT information - Calendars - Weekly/Monthly - Monthly - Monthly -Letters from the District Office or Central Office - Reminders of half-day schedules, e.g. teachers' clerical days Upon advisement - Student progress reports - Three times/year October, January, April na na na na na na - To ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents, they will be prepared for copying and mailing through the joint efforts of the school secretary and the parent coordinator. They will also be available for perusal by the parents on the school website. Parent coordinator will give notice to parents through Instant messaging System about the mailed documents. For documents that may be backpacked, the homeroom teachers will give them out before dismissal, with the instructions of showing them to their parents for perusal or signature (for those that need to be returned to the school). Announcement through the school's PA system will be given regarding documents that are sent or distributed for delivery to their parents. Parent coordinator and other main office staff will call parents to let them know about documents that they should expect from their children as soon as they get home. na na na 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 85  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent-teacher conferences 4 times a year, annual IEP meetings, tri-annual IEP meetings, etc., academic interventions and/or at risk meetings with parents by teachers, invitations to parents by the dean, guidance counselors, administrators, attendance teacher, SAPIS worker, etc., teachers requesting to meet with parents na na na September, November, March and May; as scheduled; or, as needed provide interpretation service(s)? We use over-the-phone interpretation service or bilingual school personnel. na na na na na na 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 86  - Use Language Line to inform parents they can call the school in their language by using a phone script (Language Line is an available translation and interpretation resource that can be used in communicating with parents) - Train staff to use the 3-way call system to add Language Line to incoming calls -Parent coordinator will call parents using the emergency blue card information Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. - Train staff on the content of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 - Distribution of Language Line Information - Language Access Coordinator will turnkey training on language access to all staff members. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster will be posted in the school building, and the other notification documents will be available for all community members. Our Parent Coordinator will be responsible for providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities, which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Translated versions of this document, in the covered languages are available at websites that will be provided to the parents and families. Our school will post in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance to such school a sign in each of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. We will print translated signs, in the covered languages, that are available at http://schools.nyc.gov/Offices/Translation/TipsandResources/Default.htm. Our school’s safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Our school will identify the parents of more than 10% of the children who speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language, and they will be assisted in obtaining from the Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation the signage and forms required to receive services. We will schedule parent training on translations and interpretation services. The Department’s website shall provide information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 2018-19 CEP 87  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In-house surveys, Annual NYC School Survey (Parent Survey) and direct feedback from parents during meetings (e.g., IEP meetings, parent meetings, workshops, parent-teacher conferences) will be our mechanisms in gathering parent feedback. Our school, mainly the Main Office, will follow the procedures outlined on the Translation and Interpretation Unit website in order to meet the translation and interpretation requirements set forth in this regulation. Parents who wish to receive language access services should contact our school office to know how they can avail of the services. There will be a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school that can give us feedback on the effectiveness of our practices. 2018-19 CEP 88 
