2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X152 School Name: P.S. 152 EVERGREEN Principal: FRANCES LYNCH 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Community School 152 08X152 320800010152 Pre K – 5 School Number (DBN): 1007 Evergreen Ave., Bronx, New York 10472 718 589-4560 Phone Number: 718 328 5867 Fax: School Contact Person: Email Address: Jennifer Solis-Rivera jsolisr@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Frances J. Lynch Jasmine Chandoo NoemiCastillo Jennifer Solis Rivera SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): GuillerminaFabre Not Applicable Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Not Applicable Geographical District: 8 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Karen Ames Superintendent: 1230 Zerega Ave., Bronx, New York 10462 ETobia@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212 935-3783 Phone Number: 718 828-6239 Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 NSaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 828-7776 Phone Number: 718 828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Frances Lynch Jasmine Chandoo NoemiCastillo Carole Dickens Claudia Castellanos Elementary School Elementary School Joanne Oliver Jennifer Solis-Rivera Desiree Yarrell Carolina Mena *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Teacher Teacher Teacher Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Meliana Fau Maria Castellanos Guillermina Fabre Alma Rosa Tapia Violeta Kajtazi Parent Parent Parent Parent Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Evergreen School values a shared responsibility with the community for the education of ALL learners. At Community School 152, we believe in providing a nurturing environment to foster rich, authentic experiences in curricula learning that accommodate the individual needs of students . We strive to build a cooperative link between home, school, and the community. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At CS 152 we serve, on average, about 860 children in kindergarten through grade five. An approximation of our student demographics are as follows: English Language Learners – 27%, Students with special needs – 26%, Students in temporary housing/homeless – 180 students. What makes CS 152 stand out was best written by Inside Schools. They wrote, ”...the teaching staff at PS 152 is experienced and enthusiastic. Teachers work together to plan lessons so students learn the same basics, whether they are in an English as a Second Language (ESL), team teaching class that mixed general and special education, or a general education class...". "Bright and colorful homemade material that shows off teachers’ well-thought out lesson plans and students’ work decorate the halls of classrooms." In order to better prepare teachers and students to continuously meet the demands of the CCLS and ensure a more rigorous curriculum, we will be focusing on incorporating practical insights and strategies for helping all learners meet high standards using the principles of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) as well as high level questioning techniques. Teachers will have the opportunity to read UDL Now by Katie Novack. This reading selection will promote the ideology of "choice assignments" that will foster healthy learning communities by giving students options of how to express their knowledge.. Teachers will learn to create intellectual environments that produce not only technically competent students, but also caring, secure, actively literate human beings. Studio In A School provides long term, ongoing professional development to teachers as well as parent workshops. Some additional initiatives are as follows: Master Class” are those classes that surpass the criteria for Model Class within a certain time period Monthly 100 Book Challenge Ceremonies celebrate student achievement in reading Student of the Month is celebrated highlighting specific character traits COW (Compliment of the Week) is awarded to those classes that earn the most compliments for the month Jacobi Hospital-Prenatal Program Merit-based Student Council Project Arts Morning Programs – Drama, Band and Dance Yearly celebration of student achievements (Parent Involvement) Studio in a School for all students in grades 1-5 with Professional Development for all classroom teachers with additional professional development for parents. ELA/Math Morning and Afternoon Programs in the Fall is for grades 3 – 5 and in the Spring for grades 1 and 2 2018-19 CEP 10  Universal Literacy/Math coaches available to provide support to staff and ensure that all classes are on pace with the curriculum Morning TESOL Program is set up in three sessions: Intermediate, Advanced and Beginner which runs from November to June The parent coordinator provides monthly parent outreach workshops, in areas such as: community outreach, Dial-a-Teacher, Fire Safety, Local Farmers’ Market, and best practices on supporting academics in the home Monthly newsletters and calendars are sent home in order to communicate special events Planners are given out to students to improve communication with families Word/Thought of the Day is shared every morning to improve vocabulary and reinforce the Character Trait of the Month School Website School Telephone Messenger System At CS 152 we will continue relationships with Studio in a School and The Carmel Hill Fund in order to support our students through academics and the arts. We will also be collaborating with Teacher's College, NTN, Envision Math, and, The New York Historical Society. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Language Learners – 28%, Students with special needs – 25%, Students in temporary housing/homeless – 180 students. Students with special needs require specially designed instruction to meet their individual learning styles and strengths while providing scaffolding strategies to support their weaker areas. While the ENL population benefits from a similar approach, their needs are more language based and require increased support with writing, vocabulary, and phonics. Students in temporary housing benefit from a highly structured learning environment that teaches to the whole child, meeting both academic and social/emotional needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Results of our 2017-2018 Quality Review noted that our area of celebration is a positive learning environment. Our NYS exam results reveal a the need to concentrate on ELA, therefore, our instructional focus will be in reading/writing. Teachers will ensure that there is reflection time built into their lessons for students to engage in collaborative discussions in order to help make their thinking visible. Teachers will also ensure that there are multiple entry points and UDL components incorporated in lesson planning in order to provide access to CCLS to all learners. In order to give our students more instructional time in these areas , we will continue to offer ELA/Math afternoon programs to help our struggling students with the core curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X152 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 833 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 58 59 30 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 48 48 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 90.2% % Reduced Lunch 26.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 80.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.09 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 85% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 82 82 92.2% 0.6% 22.4% 15.8% 1.7% 1.3% 4 3% 7.3 28.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2018 EOY NYS ELA, and formative classroom assessments have shown low proficiency rates in English Language Arts, throughout grades K-5. An item analysis of 2018 NYS ELA exams revealed overall strengths in the areas of determining the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in text and determining cause and effect relationships as they pertain to events in a story, as well as weaknesses in the skills of identifying the main idea and interpreting information when presented in various modalities. In an effort to align curricula to CCLS and improve student reading/writing proficiency, we have implemented Teacher’s College strategies, that we will continue to implement. We will also offer external professional development opportunities featuring research-based Orton-Gillingham multi-sensory reading strategies. There will be a continued focus on independent reading and guided reading in grades K-5. A Universal Literacy Coach will build school capacity by developing the knowledge and skills of teachers in the area of early reading and writing acquisition. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, student reading benchmark scores will increase twenty percent in grades K-5, based on BOY and EOY data. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development centered on Writing and multi-sensory reading strategies K-5 Parental engagement sessions (Super Tuesdays) will be offered to educate families and deepen their understanding of rigorous instruction in order for them to support students in the home Teachers will meet during professional learning periods with the Universal Literacy coach in order to build knowledge of foundational skills with a focus on independent reading. K-5 K-5 To address the needs of SWDs, S.P.I.R.E. phonics remediation will be implemented. ENLs will be offered an art/literacy morning program with a focus on language based needs. K-5 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 External Facilitators Administration Administration Teacher Teams Administration Universal Literacy Coach Administration Special Education Support Services Team Literacy/Math Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Universal Literacy Coach will build teacher capacity in the area of engaging families to support the extension of literacy development in the home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teacher's College $1900.00 2. Studio in a School $31,050.00 3. SPIRE Training $1614.00 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Alignment of assessments to curricula: By February 2019, in grades K-5, student scale scores will increase by ten percent based on BOY and mid-year data.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) STAR Reading benchmark scale scores Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? By the end of 2017-2018, school attendance (92.5%) and a significant number of students in temporary housing, indicated a need to promote activities that increase student engagement and social experiences. To sustain the social emotional well being of students, use the power of emotional intelligences and foster their recreational needs, we will offer activities that assist in forming healthier, compassionate and more productive students. We will continue to have an in-house mental health consultant to address student and family needs. Studio in a School will continue to help provide students with opportunities to express themselves through visual arts. Basketball will be offered, allowing for approximately 85 students to participate in a morning sports program. Classroom libraries will be expanded with the help of The Carmel Hill Fund. Students and teachers will participate in the Master Class/Educator reading incentive program and have the opportunity to earn $1000 per classroom to be used for trips, books, and classroom materials as needed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, by means of collaboration of school administration, attendance teacher, and weekly attendance team meetings, average daily student attendance will increase by 0.5% as measured by ATS data. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Independent reading and daily one-on-one conferencing with corrective feedback regarding next steps and strategies and increase instances of student:teacher interaction. District and school based professional development will be conducted in order for staff to meet the social-emotional needs of all students. AR/Master Class professional development Weekly Attendance Team meetings Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9/2018-6/2019 Administration Coaches 9/2018-6/2019 District Administration 9/2018-6/2019 AR Coordinator 9/2018-6/2019 Administration Attendance Team Members Grades K-5 SWD ENL Grades K-5 SWD ENL Grades K-5 SWD ENL Grades K-5 SWD ENL 2018-19 CEP 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator will collaborate with school attendance teacher during weekly attendance meetings and facilitate monthly workshops to promote parent engagement and increase student attendance rates from September 2018 through June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. No Cost Associated with this activity Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, average daily student attendance will increase by 0.25% as measured by ATS data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS Attendance Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Analysis of student work products guide strategic organizational decisions. These practices as well as results of the 2018 Quality Review suggest that we continue TC writing, with an emphasis on Teacher's College rubrics and checklists . Selected teachers and administrators will continue training in Writer's Workshop in order to turn-key the information. We will also continue internal professional development sessions as well as provide in-house external professional development workshops on pedagogical best practices in writing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in teacher participation in inquiry teams, with a focus on identifying a problem of practice in writing instruction, creating an action plan, and evaluating the work's efficacy in writing proficiency, as measured by Teacher's College Writing Pathways Assessments and checklists. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development in Teacher's College methodologies. K-5 Professional development on the use of checklists and rubrics to support the writing process. One-to-one student-teacher conferences to support the writing process. Professional development on Specially Designed Instruction to meet the needs of SWD and ENL students. At-risk SWD ENL K-5 At-risk SWD ENL K-5 At-risk SWD ENL K-5 At-risk SWD ENL 9/2018-6/2019 External Facilitators Administration Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 External Facilitators ELL Coordinator Field Office 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers Coach 9/2018-6/2019 District Specialized Student Support Lead 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 20  Newsletters, our school messenger system, the school website, Pupil Path, and parent workshops will include strategies for families to engage in the student writing process. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher's College $1900.00 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in teacher participation in inquiry teams, with a focus on identifying a problem of practice in writing instruction, creating an action plan, and evaluating the work's efficacy in writing proficiency, as measured by Teacher's College Writing Pathways Assessments and checklists. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Writing scores based on Teacher's College and Common Core rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Results of the 2018 Quality Review reflect alignment of school leaders, faculty, and curricula, as well as strategically integrated instructional shifts that include specially designed instruction for students with disabilities and English Language Learners. In order to continue to meet the demands of CCLS while enhancing the curriculum, the administration has formed strong ties with Teacher's College, The Carmel Hill Fund, New York Historical Society, Studio in a School, and National Training Network (NTN). In addition, we will be forming a new partnership with Envisions Math. These agencies will provide professional development opportunities to staff as well as foster the social-emotional support that drives student achievement. A school-wide teacher team study of UDL Now by Katie Kovack will assist teachers in implementing key elements of the Universal Design for Learning ideology. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, one hundred percent of lesson plans in grades K through 5 will demonstrate greater student engagement though choice assignments with the implementation of Universal Design for Learning as measured by Advance and teacher observations. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development in NTN practices, Accelerated Reader, Accelerated Math, and Envisions Math will be incorporated into our current practice. Studio in a School professional development Super Tuesday parental engagement opportunities to share information with parents on the use of these strategies. Teacher team meetings and common planning centered on key elements of UDL and student data Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9/2018-6/2019 Administration Teachers Literacy/Math Coach Field Office External Facilitators External Facilitators 9/2018-6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Grade Level Teams Literacy/Math Coach 9/2018-6/2019 Field Office Parent Coordinator Administration Grade Level Teacher Teams Grades K-5 SWD ENL Grades K-5 SWD ENL Grades K-5 SWD ENL Grades K-5 SWD ENL 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 23  Beginning in September we will invite our families to Meet the Teacher and throughout the year, our teachers, parent coordinator and parent association will offer a variety of informational and hands-on workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Cost not negotiated No cost associated with this activity No cost associated with this activity Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, fifty percent of lesson plans in grades K through 5 will demonstrate greater student engagement though choice assignments with the implementation of Universal Design for Learning as measured by Advance and teacher observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Rubric, ADVANCE data, teacher team and common planning minutes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School staff, students, and building administrators share a common goal in supporting the improvement of student outcomes, but there is a need to have greater outreach to the community served. Parent Coordinator's data reflects a need to increase parental attendance rates at weekly workshops. To ensure clear lines of communication between the school and parent communities, we will maintain a school website and telephone messenger system. Pupil Path will also be made available to parents which will provide families with monthly progress reports. In an effort to support our families, we will continue to work closely with the Department of Mental Health. We will also continue to offer resources based on community needs and parent interests. Results of a parent survey will drive the topics and activities offered on Super Tuesdays. Post workshop surveys will be offered to attendees in order to rate the value/efficacy of the information provided on a scale of 1 to 4. The 2017-2018 parent surveys suggested a need for more recreational activities. To meet this need of the community, we will implement the CHAMPS elementary program which includes non-competitive, kid-friendly activities that promote moderate to vigorous exercise through group games. In a continuous effort to support our students in temporary housing, these students will be offered participation in the Afterschool Reading Club (ARC), which includes homework help, literacy enrichment, and art projects. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 20% increase in parent Super Tuesday attendance, as evidence by attendance sheet data . 2018-19 CEP 25 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Throughout the 2017-2018 parent surveys were collected. Evaluation sheets will be distributed after parental engagement programs and assessed for rating. Workshops will be offered reflecting parent needs. Continue parent workshops concentrating on our high need students and a greater variety of activities based on parent survey results. K-5 K-5 9/2018-6/2019 Parent Coordinator Literacy/Math Coach 9/2018-6/2019 Field Office Parent Coordinator Literacy/Math Coach Field Office Outside Agencies Parent Coordinator Literacy/Math Coach Field Office Outside Agencies Continued communication throughout the year in order to increase parent involvement through the use of monthly grade newsletters, calendars, School Messenger, the use of power point news bulletins at our main entrance, school webpage and Pupil Path. K-5 9/2018-6/2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NYC Department of Mental Health and Wellness-No Cost Associated Studio In A School-$31,050.00 The Carmel Hill Fund-No Cost Associated Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 26  Cost not negotiated No cost associated with this activity No cost associated with this activity Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in parent Super Tuesday attendance, as evidenced by attendance sheet data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent surveys and post-workshop evaluation and attendance sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Determined through STAR reading assessment given three times per year Teacher Referral Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Before and During School Hours S.P.I.R.E./Orton Gillingham : Small Group A program designed to help students who show gaps in their encoding and decoding skills become fluent and accurate readers by directly teaching decoding and encoding in a structured, sequential way, while continuously addressing fluency and comprehension. Sound, word and syllable cards are used with multi-sensory strategies. Universal Literacy Initiative: To ensure that all students are reading on grade level by the end of second grade Accelerated Reader: 2018-19 CEP 28  Mathematics Determined through STAR math assessment given three times per year Science Determined by classroom teacher and AIS teacher Supports ESSA goals, through individualized differentiated assessments and leveled book program Teacher's College Writing Pathways Assessment ENVISIONS Math: Math curriculum used for kindergarten through fifth grade focused on solving math problems in an abstract manner with the use of numbers and symbols. Accelerated Math: A program that supports ESSA goals, through individualized differentiated instruction. Math practice assessments provide immediate checks on student mastery and growth. AMPLIFY – NYC Science Curriculum: Students gain a major understanding of the New York State Science core curriculum and the New York City scope and sequence Small group Before and During School Hours Small Group During School Hours 2018-19 CEP 29  Social Studies Determined by classroom teacher and AIS teacher At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Determined by SBST team, classroom teacher, guidance counselor, and resource room teacher through the use of these materials Our science program offers the following features: Hands on learning, small group instruction, lab set-up for grade four students. Passport to Social Studies Curriculum: Engages students and teachers withunit case studies of different countriesthat promote global awareness ,knowledge of worldcultures and communities, and the appropriate infusion of global perspectives into daily instruction. At-risk counseling Small Group During School Hours During School Hours Monitor student attendance One-on-One Referral to agencies for services and follow- up Communication with parents and teachers Professional Development for teachers on topics such as the assessment process, strategies to improve 2018-19 CEP 30  academic success and./or behavior In-house School DOH Mental Health Consultant 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently 180 students identified as STH.. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Guidance counselors ensure that students in temporary housing are enrolled immediately and given the support needed to make the transition to C.S.152. They are also in contact with parents and serve as liaisons to outside agencies they are affiliated with. Students with IEPs will be referred to their related service providers upon arrival. A student planner, newsletter, school calendar, and other fundamental school supplies are provided, as well as access to the school website and parent workshops. An in-house mental health consultant is available to support staff with community resources to support students and families. An After school Reading Club (ARC) will also be offered and will include opportunities for literacy enrichment, homework help, and end of week art projects. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not Applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  Not Applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Applicable 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers at C.S. 152 met the state eligibility requirements and are assigned according to their certification. In addition to administration, C.S. 152 has staff members, a literacy coach, a math coach, an ENL coordinator, and special education coordinator designated to support teachers in the areas of English Language Arts, Math, Science, Social Studies, Special Education, ESL, and data as well as, specific programs such as Accelerated Math and Accelerated Reading. This support staff is available to meet with teachers and staff. Teachers and staff at C.S. 152 receive high quality professional development from both internal and external providers. C.S. 152 coaches receive professional development on a variety of topics from the District 8 Bronx Borough Field Support Center, this information is turn-keyed and available to all C.S.152 teachers and staff. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teacher finder will be used as the primary source for a teacher pool. Credentials are reviewed and candidates are interviewed through the school hiring committee. Based on information collected during classroom observations, test scores and conversations with grade level team leaders, and administrators and coaches, the Professional Development Committee, designed professional learning plans for school-wide professional development. Designated staff members attend Teacher's College seminars and turn-key to grade teams on strategies in the use of student choice to improve the quality of writing. PD offered by Datacation will inform teachers on the use of a web-based tool that will allow them to use student performance data to tailor instruction based on the needs of the students. Professional development in the area of identifying at-risk students will be offered to teachers in grades K-5. The Universal Literacy Initiative will provide the support of a designated reading coach to develop teacher skills in the area of literacy. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 34  Not applicable. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). To facilitate the students’ transition from Pre-K to the elementary school program, C.S. 152 will host Meet the Teacher. During this time, teachers and staff meet with the parents to discuss topics related to the transition from Pre-K to K, such as Common Core Learning Standards, curriculum, schedule adjustments and documentation required for registration (physicals, immunization, 504s) On the first day of school, teachers will be reading, Ms. Bindergarten Gets Ready for Kindergarten and David Goes to School to prepare them for their journey into kindergarten. After the reading, students and parents create a small art project together. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We will continue professional development in six week intervals, beginning with math, writing, and data. The next six week professional learning cycle will ensue dependent on student performance/assessment results. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 35  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5B 5C 5D 5A 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local . . . . . 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 CEP 36   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Community School 152, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Community School 152, will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in order to support the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership in order to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in order for them to understand City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs and meetings, in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 39  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Community School 152, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 40  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 42  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Access school website for school events and happenings Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: As a result of the 2018 New York State English Language Arts Exam, the morning program entitled "Literacy, Technology, and Art" will provide an intervention program to build reading strategies to help struggling ENL students. Seeing how students for the past few years were excited about art during our previous morning programs, this year we will use this enthusiasm to integrate literature, art, and technology to enhance the students' understanding of literacy concepts. The program will focus on the Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding ENL students whose scores were below grade level on the ELA State Exams for the upper grades (3rd, 4th, and 5th) and based on monthly classroom Fountas and Pinnell assessments for the lower grades (1st and 2nd). The program will run for three days a week (Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays) in two different sessions. The first session will run for a total of 40 days from October 24, 2018 - January 25, 2019. The second session will run for a total of 40 days from February 6, 2019 - May 23 , 2019. The implementation of the two sessions guarantees that teachers have the flexibility to adjust the groups to meet the needs of the students. The total number of students to benefit from this program will be 60-70. During session I there will be three groups of classes: 3rd, 4th and 5th. Session II there will be one 1st grade class and two 2nd grade classes. All classes will be taught by certified ENL teachers. Each group will meet for one period each day of the program, three days a week, before school begins from 6:55-7:55 am. In both session I (Grades 3, 4 and 5) and session II (Grades 1, and 2) we will use the "National Geographic" curriculum. This program will incorporate non-fiction topics that will build and improve literacy skills targeting the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing within the content. This is a supplemental program and distinct from those used for daily instruction (At cost to Title III). In addition, non-fiction books will be included to support differentiated groups using Fountas and Pinnell guided reading books (At cost to Title III). Both sessions will integrate literacy, art, and technology to incorporate reading, writing, and research projects to reflect the 21st century skills practiced in the classroom. A Studio in a School artist will provide professional development to the teachers on the use of different mediums and and in turn teachers will teach the students different ways in using art with technology to respond to literature. Records of agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents' preferred language will be maintained in a binder in the office of the ENL Coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The primary goal of professional development is to enhance the teachers' craft, cultural awareness, and understanding of language acquisition process, all of which will have a direct impact on the students' social and academic development. All teachers involved in the morning program will participate in meetings during each session for two hours each to discuss program goals, pacing, assessment, updated ENL resources and ways to enhance students' learning. Meetings will be facilitated by the ENL coordinator and/or ENL teachers that will turn key information from Professional Development offered through the Office of English Language Learners (At cost to Title III). In addition, ENL teachers will participate in "Studio in a School" professional development. During this time, an artist from Studio in a School will train participating ENL teachers in various art mediums to integrate art with literacy and technology. Studio professional development will be provided to all teachers participating in the program in October for a 2 hour session. The second training will be provided in February for another 2 hours (At cost to Title III). In house and external professional development sessions are offered to staff members in the school such as National Training Network (NTN) Lit Life, RULER, Envisions Math, Teachers College Phonics (K-2), Studio in a School Long Term Program, Universal Coach workshops and modeling (K-2), Knowledge of Students using Data (Including NYSESLAT), and additional training added to the school calendar as the school year progresses (At no cost to Title III). To ensure that the professional development sessions meet the needs of the teachers, the ENL Coordinator is available to all teachers and is in constant contact with all ENL push-in teachers as well as their co-teachers. Other forms of support may include a dialogue on the subject of ENL teaching strategies, possible grouping, or NYSESLAT/NYSITELL scores with a classroom teacher (At no cost to Title III). Records of agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents' preferred languages will be maintained in a binder in the office of the ENL Coordinator. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 47  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Based on last years high demand for more parent/family art workshops, there will be two workshops on how to develop literacy skills at home using art and technology. Two Studio in a School Parent Workshops will be provided in the months of November and January during the day for two hours each. Both workshops will consist of twenty five parents to learn from a Studio in a School artist on how to use everyday materials to integrate literacy, technology and art at home (At cost to Title III). At the end of session I and session II letters (in their preferred language) will be sent home to invite parents to join their children for a special "Literacy, Technology, and Art Exhibition Breakfast. During this hour, students will share their creative literacy, art, and technology projects with family members. ENL teachers will share ideas and provide literature, technology resources, and art materials to parents so they can continue to respond to literature through art and technology at home with their children (At cost to Title III). All records, agendas, attendance sheets and invitations (in parents' preferred language) will be maintained in a binder in the office of the ENL Coordinator. In an effort to keep all parents informed and involved the Parent Coordinator provides a monthly calendar in English and Spanish that is sent home with each student. Additional copies of the monthly calendars can be found at the front counter in the main office (At no cost to Title III). These calendars provide information on grade and school wide events, holidays and workshops offered. All events are conducted in English and Spanish and translators of other languages are available as necessary (At no cost to Title III). Parents are invited to participate in and/or attend any school event. A sample of events planned for this year includes the Halloween Parade, the Breast Cancer Walk and Family Bingo Night. Other events include, “The Spring Show” that showcases the arts program at C.S. 152. The arts program which includes Drama, Select Band, and Step Team is available to all students (At no cost to Title III). The Parent Coordinator, ENL Coordinator, and Parent Association work together to provide a variety of workshops for parents. All workshops are delivered in English and Spanish and a translator is scheduled when necessary. Workshops planned for this year are: Mental Health workshops, Immigration workshops, Nutritional workshops, and Community Activities Workshops (At no cost to Title III). Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 2018-19 CEP 48  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name C.S. 152 The Evergreen School Borough Bronx School Number 152 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Frances Lynch Coach Joanne Oliver ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Laura Suarez Teacher/Subject Area Kasey Brenan/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Jasmine Chandoo/ENL Related-Service Provider Desiree Yarrell Jennifer Solis-Rivera Superintendent Karen Ames Assistant Principal Christine Baez Coach Colette Victor School Counselor Angela Vera Parent Maria Castellanos Parent Coordinator Nay Guity Field Support Center Staff Member Sabrina Cruz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 7 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 50  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 824 Total number of ELLs 252 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 30.58% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Data from yearly New York State Tests including the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL and Spanish LAB are used at the beginning of the year to give ENL teachers a snapshot of the students’ academic profile and their academic progress. This information is used in conjunction with initial assessments at the beginning of the year to form literacy groups in grades K-2 and groups in all content areas in grades 3-5. All teachers (ENL and classroom) understand that the groups are fluid and will change based on the needs of each student. Throughout the year, the ENL teachers work with their classroom teachers to analyze data collected from a variety of sources including informal assessments (teacher observations, monthly quizzes, homework, etc.) formal assessments (Accelerated Reading quizzes and Accelerated Math quizzes), and periodic assessments (Expeditionary Learning, Science and Social Studies) and benchmark assessments (Fountas & Pinnell, STAR Literacy, STAR Math). This information is used to guide the focus of whole group and small group lessons. Data on comprehension, vocabulary, writing and phonics 2018-19 CEP 51  allows for instructional planning and differentiated grouping. The primary tool used at the beginning of the school year to assess literacy skills of our kindergarten, 1st, and 2nd grade students is the STAR assessments provided through the Accelerated Reading Program from Renaissance Learning. Kindergarten students and first graders take the STAR assessment, which is a computer-adaptive assessment of 41 skills in seven critical early literacy domains. The assessment correlates highly with a wide range of more time-intensive assessments and also serves as a skills diagnostics. The STAR Reading assessment is given to students in grades 1 – 5. It is a computer-adaptive assessment of general reading achievement and comprehension. STAR reading provides nationally norm-referenced reading scores and criterion-reference scores. Once all of the students have taken the STAR assessment, teachers will have detailed individualized reports that describe individual needs that will be used in the coming year to design instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support this effort we use the co-teaching model. Our ENL teachers co-teach for four days per week for two periods per day with the classroom teachers. ENL teachers support the differentiated groups in the areas of reading, writing, and math. Both the classroom teacher and ENL teacher analyze and evaluate the previous data mentioned to tailor the curriculum to meet the needs of the students. Implementation of Teacher’s College will continue to support ELL students in writing. Students will be provided additional support with the Accelerated Reading program, English in a Flash. Also, ENL teachers will meet with the Universal Literacy Coach to monitor the progress of the ELL students’ reading levels to plan strategies of intervention. In addition, a literacy morning instruction program is provided for students at the different NYSESLAT levels. This program will meet three days a week to provide small group instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative assessments include yearly New York State Tests including the NYSESLAT, MOSL, ELA, Math and Science State exams. This information is used in conjunction with data gathered throughout the year from formal assessments (Monthly Tests, Accelerated Reading Quizzes and Accelerated Math Quizzes), periodic assessments (Teacher’s College Writing benchmarks, Expeditionary Learning, Science and Social Studies) and benchmark assessments (Fountas & Pinnell, STAR literacy and STAR Math). Results of assessments show a need of concentration in the areas of writing and vocabulary. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Each year the principal, ENL coordinator, and the ENL teachers look at a multiple array of summative data previously mentioned to guide curriculum decisions. Summative data is distributed to ENL and classroom teachers to be used for small group interventions and language instruction. Furthermore, this data is used to select morning program curriculum and invite students to participate. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Six ENL certified teachers push-in to heterogeneous ENL classrooms providing intervention services. Data from the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, teacher observations, Accelerated Reading quizzes and Accelerated Math quizzes and periodic assessments (Expeditionary Learning, Read Well, Science and Social Studies) and benchmark assessments (Fountas & Pinnell, STAR Literacy, STAR Reading, and STAR Math Data) are used to provide instruction for struggling ELLs. Specific differentiation and/or interventions for any student will vary based on each student’s individual needs. Students with disabilities, students with 4 – 6 years of service and long Term ELLs who continue to struggle, may receive services from a teacher certified in Special Education. In addition to outside interventions in grades K-2 may include Read Well extra practice lessons that are specifically designed to target sound and work recognition, comprehension and oral language development. A student struggling with basic English skills may spend time on the English in a Flash computer programs. Additional language focused interventions may include activities at a listening center. Math teachers may use Math in a Flash (Which are available in all ENL classrooms), and manipulatives. For other subjects, including Science and Social Studies, teachers use targeted, intensive vocabulary and content lessons that include a variety of scaffolding methods, including but not limited to the use of visuals (pictures and artifacts), videos, manipulatives (counting blocks, base ten, etc.), guided practice 2018-19 CEP 52  and hands-on activities in small group settings that reinforce content and vocabulary. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs are as follows: 2017 Data analysis of NYSESLAT, ELA and Math State Exams, ELL Data Analysis, RLAT, Fountas & Pinnell, STAR Math and STAR Reading and ongoing Accelerated Reading and Accelerated Math. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In the beginning of the year the ENL Coordinator disseminates the NYSESLAT and EDAT findings to the principal, assistant principal, ENL and ENL classroom teachers. All other data is provided by the principal, STAR classroom, on-line (Accelerated Math/Reader and ELA/Math STARS) and Skedula. Data collected is used to analyze the needs and programs for ELL students. ENL teachers have meetings to update, analyze and discuss adjustments needed to provide appropriate interventions for ELL students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Community School 152 has a push-in ENL program for grades K-5. The program consists of eleven heterogeneous, freestanding ENL classrooms. Of these eleven classes, all have a certified ENL teacher who pushes in for two periods (ENL and standalone) for four days for a total of 400 minutes per week, exceeding the 360 ENL minutes mandated by CR Part 154. Of the two periods per day one period is integrated co teaching and one period is standalone grouping for students requiring 180 more minutes. ENL Special Education students have a certified ENL teacher who pushes in for one period for four days of the week. The fifth day all certified ENL teachers push-in/pull-out special education students to meet the required ENL minutes mandated by CR Part 154. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In grades 1-5 ENL certified teachers push into all heterogeneous ENL classrooms for two 50 minute periods four days a week for a total of 400 minutes per week, exceeding the 360 ENL minutes mandated by CR Part 154. Kindergarten classrooms also have a full-time ENL teacher that pushes-in and for ENL services. Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes per week, Transitioning and Expanding ELLs 180 minutes per week and Commanding 90 minutes as required under CR part 154. Any ELLs in a different setting, as required by their IEPs, are serviced by our certified ENL teachers in either a push-in or pull-out setting according to their fluency levels. 2018-19 CEP 53  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To foster a smooth transition into the classroom for our ELLs, we have made an effort to ensure that each ENL classroom has at least one teacher who is bilingual in English and Spanish (either the ENL push-in or the classroom teacher). All programs, curricula and support for ELLs are grade/age appropriate. Each classroom, including ENL classrooms, receives materials based on grade level. All classrooms, including ENL classrooms use the following curriculum: Scholastic Guided Reading and Sadler Phonics (K-2 Literacy Program), Accelerated Reader (Grades K-5), Expeditionary Learning (3-5), Teachers College Writing Project (K-5) Singapore Math (K-2), National Training Network and EngageNY Math (3-5), Accelerated Math (Grades 2-5), Common Core Science and Social Studies curriculum (Grades K-5). In addition, all ENL classrooms have access to an Audio Book Lending Library in Spanish and English and computer programs such as English in a Flash, Math Facts in a Flash Reading Rainbow and Imagine Learning English. All programs are detailed below. C.S. 152 will continue the following literacy programs aligned with NYS Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) Scholastic Guided Reading and Expeditionary Learning. Scholastic Guided Reading and Sadier Phonics are combined to complete our literacy program for grades K-2. Scholastic Guided Reading Programs support a comprehensive reading program by integrating differentiated small–group instruction, assessment, and independent practice into the classroom. Teachers begin by grouping students, then prompt, encourage, and confirm how students apply problem-solving strategies as they read. Sadlier Phonics program provides explicit instruction and abundant practice for phonemic awareness, alphabetic knowledge, decoding skills, sound-symbol correspondences, and manipulating and building words. Expeditionary Learning (EL) as our ELA curriculum for grades 3-5. EL is a comprehensive K-12 educational design that emphasizes project-based, learner-centered instruction where students work in small, flexible cooperative learning groups to facilitate reaching NYS Common Core Learning Standards. This program includes Learning expeditions – long-term investigations of important real world questions and subjects - include individual and group projects, field studies, and performances and presentations of student work. All instruction, whether or not a learning expedition is underway, is characterized by active teaching, differentiation, and community service. EL’s approach to curriculum makes content and skill standards come alive for students by connecting learning to real-world issues and needs. Academically rigorous learning expeditions, case studies, projects, fieldwork, and service learning inspire students to think and work as professionals do, contributing high-quality work to authentic audiences beyond the classroom. Teachers, and students embrace the power of student-engaged assessment practices to focus students on reaching standards-based learning targets and drive achievement. Students continually assess and improve the quality of their work through the use of models, reflection, critique, rubrics, and work with experts. Staff members engage in ongoing data inquiry and analysis, examining everything from patterns in student work to results from high-stakes tests. Leadership EL school leaders build professional learning communities that focus sharply on student achievement and instruction. EL classrooms are alive with discovery, inquiry, critical thinking, problem-solving, and collaboration. Teachers talk less. Students talk and think more. Lessons have explicit purpose, guided by learning targets for which students take ownership and responsibility. In all subject areas, teachers differentiate instruction and maintain high expectations in order to bring out the best in all students and cultivate a culture of high achievement. EL incorporates modifications for ELLs including supplemental materials, research based teaching practices (scaffolding, questions, graphic organizers, video, hands-on experimental learning) and teacher flexibility in instruction is also encouraged. Accelerated Math and Accelerated Reading are two adaptive software programs which differentiate learning. Both programs are essential components to the curriculum for third through fifth grade students. This year we will continue to use Accelerated Reader in Kindergarten through 5th grade. Accelerated Reading software provides an initial assessment that establishes each child’s level of reading and assigns them a Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD) based upon their level of reading comprehension. This assessment is repeated in January and June to assess reading comprehension progress. The ZPD assigned to the student correlates with the trade books they will read throughout the school year. As students read books, they take quizzes on the computer that assess their reading comprehension of each book. As they move through the program, their ZPD is adjusted to reflect their progress. We will continue the Spanish component of the Accelerated Reader program. Newcomers who are literate in Spanish will have the opportunity to be assessed in Spanish and be allowed to read books in Spanish. As they learn English and become more proficient they will also read books and test in English. It is important to note that some Accelerated Reader quizzes are available in Spanish -books in Spanish are available to all ENL Classrooms. ENL 2018-19 CEP 54  teachers take an active role by conferencing one-on-one with ELLs prior to them taking the reading comprehension quizzes. During the conferences, ENL teachers can pinpoint issues that can be addressed during small group mini-lessons. One result of this process is that students are learning to manage their own growth in reading. Beginning in January, newcomers who are literate in Spanish will have the opportunity to be assessed in Spanish and be allowed to read books in Spanish. As they learn English and become more proficient, they will also read books and test in English. Accelerated Math is also a software-based program being used in all third through fifth grade classrooms. This year in grades 3-5, Accelerated Math will be the primary foundation for mathematics instruction with Go Math! being used as a supplement. The Accelerated Math software program provides extensive targeted and differentiated practice in specific math objectives. The objectives are carefully chosen to complement the EngageNY and NTN curriculum. The software allows teachers to assign specific objectives to their students and print out practice problems on those objectives. The students can then work on those problems and scan their answer sheets providing them with immediate feedback on their work. At the same time, the software prints out a follow-up practice worksheet addressing the needs of each student based on their performance. As the students work on their assigned objectives, the software uses an algorithm to determine when a specific student is ready to be tested and an assessment is generated for him. The teacher can then print individualized assessments, allowing students to move at their own pace and gain a sense of control over their own learning. This year we will start Singapore Math in Grades K and 1 and 2. Singapore Math is a mastery-based curriculum that focuses on conceptual understanding. It uses the Concrete, Pictorial, Abstract approach. The students are provided with the necessary learning experiences beginning with the concrete and pictorial stages, followed by the abstract stage to enable them to learn mathematics meaningfully. This approach encourages active thinking process, communication of mathematical ideas and problem solving. The books emphasize mental math and the model drawing approach. GoMath! will be used as a supplement in Grades 3-5, with Accelerated Math as the primary foundation for instruction. This program supports the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. The program focuses on the Critical Areas and depth of understanding through interactive lessons, research-based instructional approaches, and differentiated instructional resources to ensure success for all students. Particular attention is given to providing support for teachers as they transition to a focused, rigorous curriculum. Students and teachers are supported as they advance from concrete to abstract content through the use of models and math talk prompts presented in the Student Editions, and sample questions provided in the Teacher Editions. The program is designed so that teachers can easily create the environment necessary for teaching the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. GO Math! teacher and student resources are available online and in print in both English and Spanish. ENL teachers are provided with supplemental materials for ELLs. For example, an ELL Guide is available that has activities to help children acquire math vocabulary and the language and writing skills needed to communicate and understand math concepts. An English-Spanish glossary is also available for each unit. GoMath! includes a built-in RTI component with tiered interventions as well as an enrichment component for students who excel. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are given the opportunity to take subject exams in their native language when available. When native language tests are not available for ELL students, a bilingual teacher may provide oral translations. During testing, students are also provided with English-native language glossaries. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Once SIFE students are identified, staff uses multiple measures to determine the nature and extent of the students’ prior knowledge and educational experiences including LAB-R, Spanish LAB, STAR Early Literacy, Fountas & Pinnell, and STAR Math. Based on student literacy and numeracy skills classroom and push-in ENL teachers differentiate instruction through a 2018-19 CEP 55  co-teaching model with scaffolded lessons used to address the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading and writing) with an intense focus on academic vocabulary development, phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, comprehension, writing and grammar. Teachers use data from formal and informal assessments to place the students in small groups and determine the skills focus for each group. As 90% of our ELL population are native Spanish speakers we have made an effort to ease the transition with each ENL classroom having at least one teacher who is bilingual in English and Spanish (either the classroom or ENL push-in). Not only does this ease the home/school connection by encouraging communication between parents and teachers, but it helps new students to feel more comfortable in the the classroom. Moreover, teachers are sensitive to cultural differences and promote the sharing of cultures and tolerance of differences. Teachers are provided with materials and resources in native language (when possible) and multi-cultural themes are woven into curriculum. To address social and emotional needs, school counselors (one of which is Spanish-English bilingual) are available to work with students and families. Programs, curricular and support for ELLs are developmentally and age appropriate, linguistically enriching and experientially relevant. The programs used at C.S. 152 tap into students' interests and strengths in order to scaffold new information. All classrooms, including ENL classrooms use the following curriculum: Scholastic Guided Reading and Sadler Phonics (K-2 Literacy Program), Accelerated Reader (Grades K-5), Expeditionary Learning (3-5), Teachers College Writing Project (K-5) Singapore Math (K-2), National Training Network and EngageNY Math (3-5), Accelerated Math (Grades 2-5), Common Core Science and Social Studies curriculum (Grades K-5). In addition, all ENL classrooms have access to an Audio Book Lending Library in Spanish and English and computer programs such as English in a Flash and Math Facts.. All programs are detailed in section IV question 3. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Specific differentiation and/or interventions for any student, including new comers, students with 4-6 years of service, long term ELLs and students with special disabilities will vary based on each students individual needs. Students with disabilities, students with 4-6 years of service and long term ELLS who continue to struggle may receive At-Risk services from a teacher certified Special Education. In addition to outside interventions, in class interventions in grades K-2 may include Sadler Phonics extra practice lessons that are specifically designed to target sound and word recognition, comprehension and oral language development. A student struggling with basic English skills may spend time on English in Flash computer program. Additional language focused interventions may include activities at a listening center, extra practice or intensive lessons focused on decoding, phonics, grammar, vocabulary, comprehension, fluency or any skill determined by the teachers. For other subjects including Math, Science or Social Studies teachers may use Math in Flash (detailed above), manipulatives, Math online resources (videos etc.) that demonstrate math skills. These can be projected onto the Promethean or students can view independently at a computer. Targeted, intensive vocabulary and content lessons that include a variety of scaffolding methods including but not limited to the use of visuals (pictures and artifacts), videos, manipulatives (counting blocks, base ten blocks, etc.), guided practice and hands-on activities in small group setting that reinforce content and vocabulary. ELLs who have demonstrated commanding on the NYSESLAT remain in ENL classes for two years and receive ENL services for 90 minutes as per CR Part 154. This guarantees that they receive additional support that may be necessary before transitioning to a non-ENL classroom. Former ELLs are also provided testing modifications for 2 years after scoring commanding on the NYSESLAT. Additional academic, technological and native language supports in all ENL classrooms include: books available in the native language, an audio book lending library available in English and Spanish, bilingual dictionaries, picture dictionaries, English in Flash computer program, Prometheans, computers and the assurance that at least one member of each co-teaching team is fluent in Spanish. When possible, content area books are available in Spanish for students to use in the classroom and/or take home, providing students and parents with all the tools necessary to succeed. Use of these supports depends on the needs of each student. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 CEP 56  ELLs with IEPs, who are not in an ENL classroom are served through a pull-out or push-in program. The program model depends on many variables including the students’ schedules of services beyond ENL such as Speech, Physical Therapy, Occupational Therapy, Counseling, etc. and the classroom teachers’ schedules. Regardless of the model (push-in or pull-out) all students receive ENL services in a small group setting by a certified ENL teacher. The ENL teachers design lessons that address the needs of the group. Information and data collected through informal observations by the ENL teachers and conversations with the classroom teachers are used to guide the lessons. Each student receives the required number of minutes determined by his/her NYSESLAT score. Our team teaching model gives natural opportunities for the use of academic language in a small group setting. Students carry out tasks in small groups, and everyone gets a chance to contribute in a low risk, low anxiety environment, which is considered conducive to language acquisition. These sessions with two teachers allow for ELL with disabilities, especially those with attention deficit issues, the opportunity to work on tasks that address their need for movement. Students channel this need for physical activity by rotating during team teaching while given a set time for specific tasks. Our technology-based math and reading programs address the needs of the tactile learner on an ongoing basis as do the interactive activities on the Promethean . Routine one-to-one conferencing with the teacher allows for immediate corrective feedback. These small group sessions allow for task specific instruction that supports the development of academic vocabulary in each content area. There are many opportunities for the teacher to model correct usage of the English language such as explicit teacher talk, think-alouds, modeling, retelling, sharing and paraphrasing. Our technology-based math and reading programs address the needs of the tactile learner on an ongoing basis as do the interactive activities on the Promethean. Routine one-to-one conferencing with the teacher allows for immediate corrective feedback. There are many opportunities for the teacher to model correct usage of the English language such as explicit teacher talk, think-alouds, modeling, retelling, sharing and paraphrasing. To ensure that ELLs with disabilities receive all mandated services, related service providers work cooperatively to arrange each student’s schedule. In an effort to ensure that students maintain a consistent schedule, as well maintain the integrity of their Individualized Educational Plan (IEP), speech, AIS, SETTS, ESL, physical therapist, occupational therapist and the hearing specialist provide the mandated services either in the student's classroom or in a small group setting outside of the classroom. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Six ENL certified teachers push-in to heterogeneous ENL classrooms providing intervention services. Data from Accelerated Reading and Accelerated Math programs, Fountas & Pinnell, Singapore Math, and Expeditionary Learning quizzes are used to provide RTI for struggling ELLs. These programs allow students to complete work at their instructional level with interventions provided by the classroom and ENL teachers. As students produce work it is constantly being evaluated and new intervention materials are provided depending on the students’ needs. Specifically, C.S. 152 has a Response to Intervention process which is used for the ELLs. The process begins when Accelerated Math and Accelerated Reading STAR Enterprise screening is administered. Then the RTI team uses the screening report to target those students that fall under red, needing urgent intervention. Classroom teachers create intervention goals which will be implemented for six to eight weeks. Assessments will follow individualized schedules for testing according to the RTI testing guidelines. ELLs are tested weekly. After six to eight weeks, a member of the RTI team will follow-up with the teacher, and a collaborative decision will be made as to whether the student will remain at Tier I or if Tier II will be implemented. After another six to eight weeks, students who have made adequate progress may exit Tier II and return to Tier I or remain in Tier II. Students who have not made adequate progress may be referred to Tier III which is an at-risk intensive pull-out program conducted by a Special Education Teacher. If the students do not respond to Tier III intervention, the Child Study Team, with parental consent, may decide to refer the student for Special Education Services. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year we are implementing the Singapore Math mathematics curriculum. We are also using Teacher's College as the writing curriculum for all grades (K-5). 2018-19 CEP 57  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are afforded the same opportunities as monolingual students including morning programs. ELLs also have the same ability to participate in our arts programs, which this year include the Step Team, Drama Club and Select Band. ELL students are also offered a morning ENL program which is offered to students in two different sessions throughout the year and taught by certified ENL teachers. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Academic, technological and native language supports are available in all ENL classrooms and include: books available in the native language, an audio book lending library available in English and Spanish, bilingual dictionaries, picture dictionaries, the English in Flash computer program, one Promethean, and 2-3 computers per classroom and 5 iPADs per classroom. When possible, content area books are available in Spanish for students to use in the classroom and/or take home, providing students and parents with all the tools necessary to succeed. Supplemental program Go Math!, used in 3-5, includes an ELL component providing student workbooks, enrichment materials and intervention materials for ELLs. Additionally it includes a Spanish Language edition and a glossary. Expeditionary Learning also provides extensive modifications for ELLs, including the use of graphic organizers. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As 95 percent of ELLs at C.S. 152 are Spanish-speaking, we have made an effort to ensure that each ENL classroom has at least one teacher who is bilingual in English and Spanish (either the ENL push-in or the classroom teacher). Not only does this ensure that during morning drop-off, afternoon dismissal and parent/teacher conferences parents of Spanish-speaking ELLs will be able to communicate with the classroom and ENL teacher but also ensures that the student feels comfortable in the classroom. These considerations promote the home/school connection and allow parents to be involved in their child’s education Additional native language supports include literature in the student’s native language, books on CD in English and Spanish, bilingual dictionaries, picture dictionaries, and software programs English in a Flash. When possible content area books are available in Spanish for students to use in the classroom and/or take home, providing students and parents with all the tools necessary to succeed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All programs, curricula and support for ELLs are grade/age appropriate. Each classroom, including ENL classrooms, receives materials based on grade level. All classrooms, including ENL classrooms use the following curriculum: Scholastic Guided Reading and Sadler Phonics (K-2 Literacy Program), Accelerated Reader (Grades K-5), Expeditionary Learning (3-5), Teachers College Writing Project (K-5) Singapore Math (K-2), National Training Network and EngageNY Math (3-5), Accelerated Math (Grades 3-5), Common Core Science and Social Studies curriculum (Grades K-5). In addition, all ENL classrooms have access to an Audio Book Lending Library in Spanish and English and computer programs such as English in a Flash and Math Facts in a Flash. As previously described in Section V question 3, we have a number of programs to assist newly-enrolled ELLs, specifically English In a Flash, Imagine Learning, Math in a Flash, and a Spanish-English audio-book library. Cooperative grouping provides peer-supports and small group instruction provided by the classroom and ENL teachers provides instruction for new ELLs based on their needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP 58  A certified ENL teacher provides a newcomer pull-out program where students receive additional instruction. We also provide our newcomers with PenPal Bilingual Talking Dictionaries for use in the classroom. We also assign buddies that share the same native language to help them with the classroom routine and accompany them in the lunchroom. Our new students will also listen to audio books with their peers. In addition, we also provide translation for languages that are not available in the building through the over-the-phone interpreter services. The ENL teacher will also meet with the newcomer and their family to assist the student in getting acclimated to the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ENL Certified teachers will participate in workshops designed to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards for 10 hours during the Chancellor’s Conference Day on November 7th 2017 and June 7th 2018. In addition, ENL teachers will be encouraged to participate in various professional development opportunities provided by The Division of English Language Learners & Support throughout the school year, with a focus on integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Non-pedagogic staff will receive during the Monday extended days Professional Development that will include implementation of instructional strategies for ELLs in our math, reading, and writing programs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As per CR Part 154.2 the school meets the 15% (5.5 hours) of total hours for all teachers will be met by providing professional development on Language Acquisition with a focus on best practices for co-teaching and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs during the Chancellor’s Conference Days . The additional 7 hours will be attained by each ENL/bilingual teacher attending professional development offered by the Division of English Language Learners & Support. Workshop agendas will be retained by the ENL teachers and ENL Coordinator. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 CEP 59  ENL teachers will meet with parents on an individual basis to discuss ELLs language goals. Teachers will meet with parents of ELLs during Tuesday’s Parent Outreach time to discuss their child’s language development progress and host 2 workshops to encourage parental involvement and support in the language acquisition progress. Assessments/data such as NYSESLAT level, Fountas & Pinnell and Accelerated Reading/Math progress will be provided to parents/guardians. If parents/guardians speak a language other than English or Spanish, the ENL teacher conducting the meeting/workshop will utilize the DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In order keep all parents informed and involved, our Parent Coordinator provides a monthly calendar in English and Spanish that is sent home with each student. Additional copies of the monthly calendars can be found at the front counter in the main office and on a bulletin board in front of the parent coordinator’s office. These calendars provide information on grade and school-wide events, holidays and workshops that are offered for parents. All events are conducted in English and Spanish and translators of other languages are available as necessary. Parents also receive fliers reminding them of upcoming workshops, important dates and school events in English and Spanish. Parents are regularly invited into the school to participate in school events. Events planned for this year include the Halloween Parade, the Breast Cancer Walk, Dads Take Your Child to School Day, Family Engagement Night, Studio in a School Art Exhibits and workshops and “The Spring Show” that showcases the arts programs at C.S. 152. The morning arts program consists of a Drama Club, Dance, Select Band, a Step Team which are open to all students. The ENL team also invites parents to view work created during our ENL morning program sessions. A variety of workshops are offered to parents. The Parent Coordinator, Ms. Nay Guity offers parents educational workshops in English and Spanish. A sample of workshops include: “Parenting,” “Fire Safety,” “CPR,” “Middle School Options,” “Reading and Understanding Your Child’s IEP,” “Health and Nutrition,” and “Flu and Germ Prevention.” In addition to workshops presented by the Parent Coordinator, every Tuesday different grades and staff members alternate to provide workshops on pertinent topics to students and their families. These parent engagement workshops have included topics such as How to Improve Literacy Skills, Helping you Child Succeed in Writing, Reading Together at Home, Using New York City as Your Classroom and How to get Online Help with Your Child Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Frances Lynch, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: C.S. 152 School DBN: 08X152 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Frances Lynch Title Principal Christine Baez Assistant Principal Nay Guity Parent Coordinator Kasey Brenan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Castellanos Parent Chelsea Bakeman Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Solis-Rivera Teacher/Subject Area Colette Victor Joann Oliver Angela Vera Karen Ames Sabrina Cruz Laura Suarez Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other ENL Coordinator Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X152 School Name: The Evergreen School Superintendent: Karen Ames The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nay Laura Guity Suarez Parent Coordinator ENL Coordinator Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. C.S. 152 employs three methods to determine the oral and written language of preference of parents. The Home Language identification Survey (HLIS) asks parents to indicate the language in which they prefer to communicate (oral and written) with school staff. The second method, is the Emergency Card. The Emergency Card ask parent’s preferred language for written and oral language for communication. This information can be then updated into ATS which will update the RAPL (the RCPL and RAPL shows the language the parent’s preferred written and oral language for communication in ATS). The third method is the Parent/Guardian Language Preference form (provided by the Department of Education in nine languages). This information is input into ATS where it is accessible at anytime during the school day. 2018-19 CEP 63  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Amharic (AKA Ethiopian) Arabic Bengali Fulani English Slavic Spanish Wolof 1 4 3 1 532 1 600 1 0.09 0.35 0.26 0.09 45.54 0.09 52.49 0.09 1 4 2 1 535 1 599 0 0.09 0.35 0.17 0.09 46.81 0.09 52.41 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Monthly Curriculum Calendar (per grade) Monthly Parent Newsletters School Calendar Important Notices/Reminders of upcoming events translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In house Spanish translation 2018-19 CEP 64  Community Resource Centers - Community Outreach Parent Association Meetings Parent Engagement "Super Tuesdays" Events Parent Teacher Conference announcements New York State Testing dates Morning Program Letters C.S. 152 Website-English/Spanish 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? In house Spanish translation. One to one conference-telephone translation Meet the Teacher Night September 2017 Parent Teacher Conferences "Super Tuesday" Parent Engagement Workshops Teacher/Parent/Guidance Counselor Tuesday meetings/calls Parent Events - Community Outreach ENL Annual Parent Meeting November 2017 March 2018 Every Tuesday Per coordinator schedule Per school calendar 2018-19 CEP 65  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, most staff members speak Spanish to quickly reach parents. Staff will be trained to use 3-way call system to add Language Line to incoming calls. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. To ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 the Language Access Coordinator will turnkey training on language access during the Monday Professional Development session. In addition arrangements will be made to invite Field Language Access Coordinators to conduct informational workshops to all staff (Over the phone interpretation Services, 3 way line). Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To provide parents of Language Assistance Services the following will be provided:  Brochures/flyers will be provided to parents during PTA meetings  Multilingual Welcome poster posted at the entrance of the school  Language ID guide will be posted at entrance (security desk, main office) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Coordinator will conduct an annual survey using Language Line to survey parents about language assistance provided during the school year. 2018-19 CEP 66 
