2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X157 School Name: P.S. 157 GROVE HILL Principal: RAMONA DURAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Grove Hill – P.S. 157X N/A Pre-Kindergarten – grade 5 School Number (DBN): 07X157 757 Cauldwell Avenue, Bronx, New York 10473 718-292-5255 Phone Number: 718-292-5258 Fax: Ramona A. Duran rduran@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Ramona A. Duran Jessica McDonnell Jasmine Nieves Jasmine Nieves DomingaGarciaPena N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Avenue Bronx, New York 10456 RAlvare4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6500 Ext 1 718-742-6548 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bx,NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/(718) 741-8895 (718) 828-6280 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Ramona A. Duran Jessica McDonnell Jasmine Nieves Maria Villanueva DomingaGarcia Pena N/A N/A N/A Brenda Velez Erica Brown Kendra Williams Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher – Special Education Paraprofessional Member 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joanna Nowakowski Nancy Rodriguez Lillian Lewis Sandy Rodriguez Vita Haskin N/A N/A N/A N/A Member Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of P.S. 157X-Grove Hill School is to commit to providing “an atmosphere saturated with enrichment and achievement” as we pursue our “sincerity of purpose and dedication” to address the needs and interests of all students. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Grove Hill – P.S. 157X is located in the Mott Haven section of the South Bronx. The school is surrounded by new housing developments, single/two family homes, low/middle/high income apartment houses and, City Housing projects. In addition, there are three (3) homeless shelters in the area. The quiet tone makes it conducive to learning. The school culture exemplifies our commitment to children and our continued efforts to provide the most up-to-date quality education possible. Our population is largely Hispanic. Ninety-nine (99%) of the new students speak little to no English.and/or have never attended school. Based on our belief of reaching the whole child, we provide several forms of dance ( jazz, tap, ballet) and art based on the social studies curriculum. Additionally, we partner with various cultural centers/agencies such as the New York City Ballet. Our well thought out SMART goals focus on areas identified as "in need of improvement" as per the 2018 February/March PPO, the 2017-2018 School Survey and State/City assessment data. Upon analysis of this year's data, we decided to continue concentrating on reading comprehension skills for all students. The data suggested that emphasis on students within grades 3-5 would be important. In the past, we concentrated efforts on early childhood students especially in the area of phonics/phonemic awareness to ensure their reading readiness. As a result, we saw a definite increase in students' ability to read in the lower grades. School assessment data indicates that our students are progressing in ELA an Mathematics. Assessment data from 2017-2018 shows that 3rd grade students made headway with 47% on Levels 3 & 4. In total, students increased their ELA and Mathematics achievement by 12%. This demonstrates that our instruction in reading and mathematics is on target and our strategies are successful. To continue this upward trend, we will use data driven instruction combined with test simulations. In addition, we will continue to use Data Wise, "which is a step by step guide to using assessment results to improve teaching and learning", as part of our inquiry process. Extensive professional development focuses on data drive instruction in all grades based on grade level standards and Units of Study. We have carefully selected three core elements being implemented school-wide. They are 1) a focused and coherent curriculum, 2) clear and prioritized lesson and 3) purposeful reading/writing authentic literacy. We will continuously clarify, model, practice and monitor these initiatives until all teachers have mastered them. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our special needs population is comprised of ICT classes and 12:1 classes. The test data shows that students in this demographic population have made positive academic gains. Their special needs mainly consists learning disabilities, speech problems and physical/OT issues. During the 2017-2018 school year we collaborated with PS 469X which has been discontinued 2018-2019. However, we will still continue to analyze the needs of our special needs population with an eye towards ensuring continued growth in ELA and Mathematics. The test data shows that our students with disabilities did make good gains in 2017-2018. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  The Framework for Great Schools: We are confident that we are continually progressing towards the end goal of increasing student academic achievement using the Framework for Great Schools. Our supportive school culture addresses safety, classroom behavior and social emotional development for all students. All staff, administration and teachers, respect and trust one another. Teachers share concerns and/or frustrating and collaboratively work towards greater student achievement. Most Progress: The most progress was made in our rigorous instruction and our collaborative teachers implementation. The positive impact of our best practices led to an increase of 12% - 14% in Mathematics and ELA in 2017-2018. We set high standard for all students as we focus on critical thinking skills. Through collaboration, teachers have become well acquainted with the 3 Core Elements (section 2, paragraph 6). These elements address the need for focused coherent curriculum, we developed lesson plans and authentic reading/writing tasks and activities. We diligently address staff development by providing many professional development opportunities. All teachers also collaborate during weekly professional learning communities and common planning periods. We also made excellent progress in our parental engagement/involvement and it has risen well above from last year's 2 to the almost 4 in 2017-2018. Our successful efforts in Strong Family-Community Ties will continue with Terrific Tuesdays and various parent friendly workshops and communication regarding school and community events/resources. We will conduct our 3rd Annual Parent Summit in 2018-2019. The Saturday events include various health/wellness and informative workshops. The school also provides breakfast, lunch and childcare.  We will continue to build and maintain strong family-community ties. A staff member has been assigned to work closely with the PC (Parent Coordinator) to support family communication and build relationships with community resource organizations to advance the school mission. We will be holding our third Parent Summit this coming year 2018-2019.  We will continue to focus on rigorous instruction by utilizing Common Core Learning Standards aligned questions and discussion techniques to develop higher order questioning techniques.  We will provide professional additional professional development and mentors to all new and second year teachers as per the Effective School Leadership component of the Framework for Great Schools.  We will continue to focus on working on best pedagogical practices to maintain and improve on academic outcomes based on the 2017-2018 data.  We will also continue our focus on writing for all students. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X157 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 644 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 67 66 28 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 7 26 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 91.5% % Reduced Lunch 9.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.3% 65.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 18.25 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 80% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 63 62 28 89.1% 4.3% 20.5% 31.4% 0.2% 2.6% 6 0% 8.9 32.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A rigorous curriculum is the best predictor of high academic performance and future success in College. Strengths:  Providing professional development for all teachers. As we look ahead to increasing student achievement we must first review the Common Core Learning Standards to ensure clarity regarding the most important things students should know and be able to do.  High expectations for all students based on essential skills that students needed for college and career readiness;  Data indicates increases in ELA and Mathematics assessments on Formative, Summative and State Tests;  Reflection of pedagogical best practices in order to achieve academic improvement for all students;  Data indicates we are supporting our ELLs, and Students with Disabilities in gaining academic growth;  Our school culture, shows collegiality, respect, integrity with high expectations and teacher commitment to improvement;  Commitment to teacher preparation and development;  A coherent instructional program, with 3 Core Elements, Standards Based Cohesive Curriculum, Authentic Literacy Tasks, Effective Planning and Instruction;  Knowledge that our teachers are very capable of highly effective instruction.  Close School alignment to the Framework for Great Schools.  Inter-visitation activities within and across grades. Priority Needs that will be addressed in the goal and action plan will be :  Continue to closely monitor the implementation of rigorous tasks across all grades;  Establish a clear, sequential curriculum for every content area, with emphasis on reading, writing, speaking  and reasoning. Focus on phonics and phonemic awareness in early grade to maintain and build upon increasing reading levels;  Our data shows that our focus on phonics/phonemic awareness in the early grades has been very positive in increasing reading levels;  Continue to provide professional development in pedagogical best practices to increase gains on ELA and Mathematics tests; 2018-19 CEP 13  Continue to work within the Assessment Calendar/Plan;  Utilize simulations tests to inform data based on instructional decisions and necessary revisions to improve student performance and teacher pedagogical practices;  Continue training our teachers in Competent Kids, Caring Communities, a Social Emotional Learning Program which we acquired through the Ackerman Institute.  Continue with our implementation of Mental Health Program for all through the auspices of the NYC Department of Health;  Put into action a plan for bringing into the school a Dental Health clinic to address student dental problems as a preventive activity;  Continue our focus on writing for all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #1: (5A) By June, 2019, teachers in grades 3 - 5, will continue to practice a system of curriculum, instruction and assessment, enabling students to be engaged in creative and rigorous learning experiences grounded in clearly defined standards as measured by a 5% increase on the ELA State Test. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Hold daily grade wide PLC workshops on unpacking/aligning the CCLS Standards;  Review the 3 Core Elements (Coherent curriculum, PreK-5 Teachers + Clusters effectively structured lessons, authentic literacy) thereby creating a rich curriculum that places reading, discussion, and writing at the center of instruction,.  Administer baseline assessments PreK-5 Teachers Sept, 2018 Literacy/Math/Data Coaches, Administrators  Review simple step-by-step "gradual release of responsibility" instruction based on clear and academically worthy learning objectives. PreK- 5 Teachers + Clusters  Prepare monthly content calendar of lessons to serve as a clear guide to what teachers should teach and the order in which it should be taught.  Continue to discuss and develop lesson plans focused on higher-order thinking skills with scaffolding and multiple entry points to move from compliance to a higher level of student engagement. PreK-5 Teachers + Clusters Sept, 2018 Sept 2018 - Oct.2019 Teachers with support from Literacy/Math Coaches, Administrators Teachers/Coaches/Admin Oct. 2018 - Dec. 2019 Teachers, Coaches, Administrators  Continue Data Analysis and Inquiry in order to discuss data findings from various sources (including test simulations, curriculum assessments and formative/summative assessments); PreK-5 Teachers + Clusters Every two weeks beginning Teachers, Coaches, Administrators  Continue with Book Study on Explicit Direct Sept. 2018 Instruction Lesson Planning 2018-19 CEP 15  Continue practice of inter-visitations within and across grades through lesson study activities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In conjunction with the Parent Coordinator and all Administrators, parent workshops explaining data and its use will be implemented. Rigorous instruction and Common Core Learning Standards will also be addressed allowing parents to provide academics in the home in order to support student learning. Teachers facilitating the workshops will demonstrate various strategies and provide relevant resources. Workshops will be given on a monthly basis beginning September, 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Needed : ● Schedules that allow for common preparation periods as well as periods for daily staff development as per Professional Learning Communities initiatives; (Already in place) ● Time for Literacy Coaches/Math Coaches/Data Specialists to collaborate on data based professional development initiatives that address teacher professional needs and student instructional needs to ensure 2018-2019 AYP goals are met. 2018-19 CEP 16  ● School monies will be utilized to support achievement of annual goal as stated in Part 2 (Annual goal) above including:  Programs for after-school initiatives to meet the needs of general education, ELL and Special Education students;  Programs providing professional development opportunities for teachers;  Programs to increase positive parent engagement with daily school life;   Allocation of available monies for per-session activities, after-school programs, teachers and supervisors;  Continue the implementation of the New Teacher Center Teacher Induction Plan which ensures that program Saturday Academy for Reading and Mathematics; requirements are met, Mentors/Mentees are provided adequate mentoring time and novice teachers are supported.  ESL program to support the needs of our English Language Learners. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At midpoint, January, 2019, strategies/activities will be revisited and re-adjusted. By that time, teachers in grades 3 - 5, will be working with a system of curriculum, instruction and assessment engaging students in creative and rigorous learning experiences grounded in clearly defined standards making a 2.5% progress as measured by ELA simulation tests. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Simulation assessments using Coach test preparation booklets, formal/informal data and student discussion. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? SCHOOL STRENGTHS : ● The school has assigned a Social Worker, a Guidance Counselor and a Teacher Liaison to foster student character development. In addition, a comprehensive referral system that strategically supports students. Said system effectively addresses social-emotional barriers, health and academic barriers. This coupled with our Response to Intervention (RtI) systems works successfully to identify academically at risk students. Additionally, we have a teacher who works on Character improvement. we have a strategic and comprehensive system for referrals and support for all students that effectively addresses barriers to social and emotional developmental health and academic success coupled with Response To Intervention. This system is working extremely well in identifying students who may be having difficulty with academics. Competent Kids, Caring Communities, assists us with identifying students who may be having difficulty with social and emotional developmental health issues.  The school is extremely safe and conducive to learning.  Teachers are well in charge of their students and a school-wide discipline and reward program helps to  support their efforts. Students are aware of behavioral expectations and those expectations are supported by the teachers and enforced by Administrators through-out the building.We will continue use of the Competent Kids, Caring Communities, Social Emotional Health Program  There are no suspensions and/or disciplinary incidents.  Collected data is collaboratively analyzed and the results lead to the development of comprehensive instructional plans which capture students current levels of achievement. for all students. In addition, the data helps teachers with curriculum mapping that provides a clear and timely path to growth and includes students as active participants in their own learning.  ELA assessment scores for students in grades 3 - 5 increased by 14% during the 2017-2018 academic year.  The school has been awarded the Respect for All Award three (3) years in a row (2014-2015, 2015-2016, 2016-2017).   PRIORITY NEED: ● Continue to develop partnerships that support and sustain social and emotional developmental health. Attendance and tardiness, which is an ongoing concern, will be addressed by the Attendance Team. The team, comprise of the Attendance Teacher, the Parent Coordinator and an assigned teacher, will implement various parent and student activities, such as Early Physical Education Program, to encourage students in this area.  Continue our work with the Ackerman Family Institute this coming school year (2018-2019) as part of the Competent Kids, Caring Communities Social Emotional Health Program; 2018-19 CEP 18   Build upon the 14% gain in Mathematics, focus will continue to be placed on using data to support students in problem solving and constructed responses. All ratings above are based on a combination of March, 2018, PPOs, State Test data and self-assessment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 2: (5B) By June, 2019 we will continue to implement social-emotional development through the Competent Kids, Caring Communities curriculum, across all classrooms as evidenced by a 5% decrease in student in-house SAVE Room suspensions. . 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Continue partnership with Competent Kids, Caring Communities by contacting consultants to discuss availability of additional resources and services;  Collect and distribute data derived from last year's Competent Kids, Caring Communities implementation;  Analyze data and make revisions to curriculum as deemed necessary; Students, Parents, Staff members Competent Kids, Caring Communities Consultants, Administrators, Parent Coordinator, PTA, Teachers, Coaches July, 2018 Sept. 2018 Beg. of Oct. 2018 ● Continue to promote social-emotional development in the classroom as per the Competent Kids, Caring Communities curriculum guidelines, Teachers, Sept 2018 Literacy Coaches, Math/Data Specialist/Coach, Administrators, 2018-19 CEP 20  Continue with Conflict Negotiation (Problem Solving), Regulating Emotions and Behaviors, Engagement and Persistence, Responsible Conduct and Integrated Approaches for English Language Development and Family Engagement; ● Utilize teachable moments through adult/student modeling of social emotional learning skills and discussion of relevant situations and per Competent Kids, Caring Communities guidelines; ● Use social awareness and interpersonal skills to establish and maintain positive relationships; ● Demonstrate decision-making skills and responsible behaviors in personal, school and community contexts. Teachers, Students Sept. 2018 Teachers, parents, students, Literacy Coaches, Math Coaches, Administrators ● Implement developmentally/culturally competent instruction and community building activities; Teachers, Sept. 2018  Allow students the opportunity to contribute to their class, school and community as per the Competent Kids, Caring Kids guidelines; ● Implement after-school and community activities that are aligned with Social and Emotional Learning school efforts;  Based on available budget, after-shool programs will tentatively begin the end of October, 2018; Revisit strategies/activities and adjust for continuous improvement at three month intervals (September, 2018, January 2019, May, 2019) Continue monitoring in-house suspensions October, 2018 Oct. 2018 Every 3 months: Sept 2018 Jan. 2019 May, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator, administrators and other staff/personnel will address the area of Supportive Environment with parents. Parents will be involved in the continued implementation of Competent Kids Caring Communities an 2018-19 CEP 21  Social Emotional Curriculum. We will work closely with parents to address any issues and/or concerns with student behavior and/or home issues that may impact adversely on student learning and school environment. Additionally, we will hold our Third Parent Summit to strengthen the partnership between the school, the parents and the community. Preparations for the third Parent Summit will begin in September, 2018 and the Parent Summit will be held on or around the 8th of June, 2019. Parent workshops topics include but are not limited to, parents working with the school and their children, School Data, Achievement Data, School Survey Data, School Quality Review Data, Community Resources, and issues/concerns in the community that might affect student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Leveraging of Resources: ● Ensure clear Planning; ● Professional development to teachers through Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) and Monday Staff Development, ● Program(s) will go through the evaluation process to ascertain appropriateness and effectiveness; ● Fostering of partnerships with Competent Kids, Caring Communities and various cultural agencies (ex. Carnergie Hall, City Ballet) will continue. Five classes in grades 3-5 will participate in the Nutcracker Project. Staff Developes will work with selected classes on Nutcracker based activities. The culminating event is a holiday season trip to the City Ballet to see the Nutcracker performance; ● Establishment of a framework enhancing the implementation of Response to Intervention( RtI) program as part of a continuum of evidence based behavioral and academic interventions. ● Establish School-wide Positive Behavior Supports for all students. ● Saturday Academy for Reading and Math depending on budget;  All funding is consolidated therefore other funding sources may be used, as available, to support the instructional goal(s) such as School-Wide Projects, Title I, Title IIA, etc. as indicated/necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Strategies/activities will be continuously revisited and adjusted for continuous improvement if necessary. By January, 2019 the Competent Kids, Caring Communities will be a well ingrained school-wide program as evidenced by a 2.5% decrease of in-house suspensions. The June 2019 end of year goal is a 5% decrease. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 22  Checklists, Informal and formal observations and In-house suspension data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. SCHOOL STRENGTHS : ●All teachers have mandated professional development with and across grades. Grade level common planning time provides structure for teachers to participate in development activities and share instructional challenges and best practices. ● Team planning includes administrators, coaches and teachers. Research indicates that student achievement increases when teachers of various levels of experience collaborate on improving student learning. ● Teachers present/turn-key to their peers on a weekly basis; ● Professional development is based on teacher needs, teacher input and student/school needs. Teachers assume collective responsibility for student learning as part of interdisciplinary collaboration that results in higher student performance on ELA and Mathematics assessments. ● The tone of the building is conducive to learning with students and adults understanding the high expectations which exists for academic achievement and behavior.  A distributed leadership structure promoting teacher leadership is embedded so effective teacher leaders play an integral role in key school-wide decisions. Teachers engage in inquiry based collaborations which strengthens their instructional capacity and promote use of Common Core Learning Standards instructional shifts. AREAS FOR IMPROVEMENT : ● As per current Quality Review area of focus, (Assessments) the school will work diligently to ensure that we are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards in terms of assessments as well as District and School instructional goals. ● Many professional development opportunities are provided on best pedagogical practices and belief on how students learn best. rigorous instruction ensures that all we working within a focus on continuous improvement.  Additional support will be given to Students with Disabilities so that we see continuous improvement during 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP 24  ● Ratings above are based on a combination of PPO. March, 2018 , data and self-assessment and 10/17/18 Quality Review.  A focus will be placed on improving student attendance/tardiness by implementing strategic and engaging student programs and emphasizing to parents the school/tardiness relationship between attendance and academic achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #3: (5C) By June, 2019, teachers will collaboratively analyze data and implement plans that will reflect CCLS aligned questions and discussion techniques in the classrooms as measured by a 5% increase in the State Math Test. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Teachers will collaborate during Professional Learning Teachers Communities to align Common Core Learning Standards with questioning and discussion techniques.  Teachers will use protocols to analyze instructional trends that address the needs of students with emphasis on the needs of New Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Beg. in Sept At beginning of each Unit - every 5 to 6 weeks Literacy Coaches, Math/Data Specialist/Coach, Administrators,  Data analysis will be conducted during Data Team Teachers Weekly, meetings and findings/recommendations will be used to design action plans which impact teaching and learning.  During grade level meetings teachers will identify areas of strength as well as areas in need of improvement;  Teachers will identify outcomes that will improve teaching and learning. 2018 – 2019 Literacy Coaches, Math/Data Specialist/Coach, Administrators,  Data Team findings/recommendations will be used to Teachers design action plans that will impact teaching and learning throughout the school year.  Teachers will collaboratively design interdisciplinary strategies/activities that provide student opportunities leading to increased academics in Mathematics. At beginning of every month Literacy Coaches, Math/Data Specialist/Coach, Administrators, Weekly, 2018-2019  Teachers will collaboratively monitor Math progress using formative and summative assessments data in order to drive instruction. Teachers Sept, 2018 – June, 2019 Literacy Coaches, Math/Data Specialist/Coach, Administrators, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 26  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In conjunction with the Parent Coordinator, administrators, instructional coaches and selected staff will facilitate parent workshops to support parental understanding of the collaborative aspect of teaching to support student achievement. Workshops will be given throughout the school year starting in September, 2018 and ending in June, 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources Needed : ● Schedules that allow for common preparation periods, daily staff development and Professional Learning Communities initiatives; (Already in place) ● Time provided for Literacy Coaches/Math Coach/Data Specialist to meet and develop professional development to meet teacher instructional needs and student instructional needs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Strategies/activities will be revisited and adjusted for continuous improvement. By January, 2019, teachers will have made a 2.5% growth towards a 5% June, 2019 gain in student achievement Competent Kids, Caring Communities will be well ingrained school-wide as evidenced by a 2.5% decrease of in-house suspensions. The June, 2019 end of year goal is a 5% decrease in student suspensions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Formal and informal observations, interim assessments, pd agendas, lesson plans, ReadyGen Unit Assessments, Go Math Unit Assessments, Running Records, Coach Simulation Tests in English Language Arts and Mathematics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Strengths : ● The school operates using a supportive shared leadership model; ● There is mutual accountability and a shared vision that positively affects teacher practice and brings about student improvement in learning and achievement; ● Professional Learning Communities are well established and provides teacher leadership opportunities; ● Teachers work and learn together in collaborative teams; ● Implementation of inter-visitations/peer observations, lesson study, debriefing and coaching of each other; Students have increased their reading scores throughout the year based on 2018 Data; Students in grades Pre-K - 2 have increased their levels based on 2018 Data; The School leader and teacher peers support the development of teachers, including those new to the profession with effective feedback and next steps from the strategic use of frequent cycles of classroom observation and analysis of student work and data. The School leader has a transparent system in place for managing professional development, making informed decisions and developing succession plans; resulting in improved student work products. PRIORITY NEEDS : ● Ensure all stakeholders are included and impart a shared sense of vision regarding the urgency of achieving student goals tied to the School Comprehensive Educational Plan. ● Ensure that schedules make i possible for ALL staff to take part in the professional learning communities; ● Provide opportunities for students to attend after-school/Saturday programs that support student achievement in connection with the Comprehensive Education Plan goals and providing different entry points to support Students With Disabilities and ENLs; ● Implementing more in-depth data driven instruction together with assessment simulations to be given during 5 Instructional periods beginning with Instructional Period 1 from 9/7/18 - 10/28/18, then Instructional Period 2 from 2018-19 CEP 28  10/31/18 - 12/16/18, followed by Instructional Period 3 from 12/19/18 - 3/3/19, then Instructional Period 4 from 4/6/19 - 5/5/19 and finally Instructional Period 5 from 5/8/19 - 6/16/2019. Assessment Data will be analyzed and instruction will be adjusted where necessary to improve student academic achievement as well as teacher pedagogy. ● Ratings are based on a combination of , PPO, March 2018, State ELA and Math Test data and self-assessment and Quality Review, 10/17/18. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #4: (5D) By June, 2019, all teachers, will continue to receive in-house professional development supporting professional growth in best practices, as measured by a 5% increase in student achievement through comparisons of baseline and end of year assessments. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Share rationale for professional development and support to enhance teacher pedagogy and student achievement; Administrators, Teachers, Students Sept, 2018 - October, 2018 Administrators, Coaches, Data Specialist Administrators, Coaches (Math and Literacy/Data Specialist) Administrators, Literacy Coaches, Math Coach/Data Specialist) Administrators, Literacy Coaches, Math Coach/Data Specialist, Teachers Provide professional development for the fundations and Wilson curricula; Schedule daily and/or weekly professional development opportunities such as PLCs and Monday after-school. Teachers, Oct. 2018 October, 2018 Communicate the importance of professional development and its implications for student achievement; Teachers, Staff, Community Partners, Sept, 2018 - June, 2019 Inform staff of differentiated observations based on grade, instructional level and identified student needs; Students, Teachers, Cluster Teachers Implement next steps to address identified needs from observations and then "look-fors" in subsequent observations; Continue to work with inter-visitations and lesson study across grades and within grades. Sept. 2018 October, 2018 - June, 2019 2018-19 CEP 30  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. An empowering series of Understanding School Leadership parent workshops (3 in total) will be presented at 3 month intervals beginning in September, 2018. Parent leadership will be encouraged through-out the year by providing multiple collaborative opportunities between home and school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Administrators; ● Teachers; ● Literacy Coaches; ● Math/Data Specialist/Coach; ● Parents; ● Students; ● Community Partners (if available); ● Scheduling of Meetings with teachers; ● Scheduling of Workshops for Parents; Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Strategies/activities will be revisited and adjusted for continuous improvement. A midpoint benchmark has been established for January, 2019. By midpoint, progress should be made at a 2.5% of an expected 5% increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Checklist, Formal and Informal Observations, Student Progress on assessments such as Running Records, ReadyGen Unit Assessments, GoMath Unit Assessments, Test Simulations in ELA/Math using Coach. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. SCHOOL’S STRENGTHS : ● There is a full-time Parent Coordinator; ● Established outside partnerships with City Ballet, Juilliard, Carnegie Hall, FAN4Kids, and Montefiore Hospital; ● School culture and tone is professional, collaborative and risk-free ● High expectations for students and staff members ● Use of data driven instruction; ● Reading and Mathematics curricula aligned with Common Core Learning Standards; ● School Leader manages daily operations and environment through efficient alignment of resources, vision and goals; ● The school operates within the Distributive Leadership model; ● Safe and supportive learning environment ● Distributive Leadership; ● Partnership with the American Heart Association and Teaching Gardens ● Continued established Partnership with Competent Kids, Caring Communities to promote Student Social and Emotional Health Collaboration between Teacher Parent Liaison and Parent Coordinator to provide various parent engagement opportunities. This includes but is not limited to Dads Walk your Child to School Day and an annual Parent Summit. PRIORITY NEEDS : ● Continued communication of data to all stakeholders to ensure an understanding of its impact on instruction; ● Ensure understanding of data and its impact on instruction by all stakeholders (staff, parents, community agencies, etc. 2018-19 CEP 32  ● Use effective public information strategies to communicate with families and community members such as email, night meetings, written material that is translated, etc., ● Gather school, family members and community resources to positively impact student learning; ● Provide opportunities for adult learning such as GED classes and ENL classes  Involve families in school initiatives to decrease absenteeism and tardiness Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL #5 (5E) :By June, 2019, a third Parent Summit will be held to foster partnerships with families and community based organizations, as evidenced by the School Calendar of Events and a 5% growth in parent attendance at meetings and other school activities. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Provide professional development for school personnel on effective strategies for engaging families. Teachers and other staff Sept. 2018 and on-going Literacy Coaches, Math Coach/Data Specialist Provide workshops for parents on Data and the Use of Data including its impact on teacher practices and student achievement; Ensure that parents are re-informed of the Competent Kids, Caring Communities Scholarship, its implementation and when and where possible involve parents in the actual program's components. In addition, reach out to parents during Parent-teacher conferences, school events and other activities. Create a team for planning and implementing family engagement in our school community (to include teachers, parents, community representatives and principal) Sept 25, 2018 and on-going Teachers, Parents, Community Representatives, Administrators Administrators, Literacy Coaches, Math Coach/Data Specialist Survey parents and analyze data to identify their needs/concerns and preferences in order to create relevant opportunities for home-school engagement Parents, September, 2018– June, 2019 Keep track of the parents who we are able to contact and those that we cannot and – adapt strategies to engage “high priority families” such as those with children who may be having academic and/or behavior difficulties. Provide and link parents to need services, in order to support them with social emotional health issues as well as the instructional practices used by the teachers and how students' academic achievement is impacted. Parents, Community Service Providers September, 2018 – June, 2019 Administrators, Literacy Coaches, Math Coach/Data Specialist, Parent Coordinator, Community Partners Administrators, Literacy Coaches, Math Coach/Data Specialist, Parent Coordinator, Community Partners 2018-19 CEP 34  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Fan4Kids, Competent Kids, Caring Communities, Teaching Gardens, Health First, Wellness Committee, NYU Dental Clinic, Montefiore Health Clinic( in process). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. RESOURCES NEEDED : ● Use of Title I Parental Involvement funds for Workshops, etc. ● Scheduling Time for Meetings and workshops; ● Setting up ENL/GED Classes; ● List of community resources and community based organizations; ● Scheduling Time to plan for outreach to parents; ● Purchase of Food for parent meetings other events; ● Scheduling time for Parent Coordinator to assemble team for planning and implementing family engagement; ● All funding is consolidated therefore other funding sources may be used, as available, to support the instructional goal(s) such as SWP, Title I, Title IIA, etc. as indicated below. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Strategies/activities will be revisited and adjusted for continuous improvement. In addition, a January, 2019 mid-point benchmark will be established. At that point of progress we should be at the 2.5% growth of a 5% total growth in parental involvement. Adjustments/revisions will be made if necessary. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Attendance Sheets, Agendas, Parent Surveys, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Fundations; Zip Zoom; Text Talk; Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day in special education classes, after-school and out of class... Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Below Reading Level for Grade and/or Level 1 student and median level score (305) between Levels 2 and 3 for grade 3, 303 for grade 4 and 304 for grade 5. Below Math Level for Grade and/or Level 1 students and median level score 299 grade 3 and 298 for grade 4 and 298 for grade 5. Level 1 student in State Science Test Level 1 Students in Reading and Math as well as below reading level for grade At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) As per IEP and/or due to at-risk services and based also on performance on ELA/Math if standard accommodations. Literacy by Design, Voyager, Wilson , Focus on word problems and numeracy Students work on Science projects and use science manipulatives. Science is integrated into other content areas. Students learn and apply social studies concepts and skills to group projects including literacy, mathematics and other content areas. A comprehensive guidance curriculum is a key component to any school setting and as such the guidance counselor One to one or two to one during preparation period instruction, push-in, small groups During Extended Day; AIS period, after-school On an individual student basis In classrooms and in Science Room. In small groups; Preparation period instruction; push-in In classrooms and in Social Studies/Art Room. Small Group Counseling, Classroom Guidance, Individual Counseling Scheduled as needed. 2018-19 CEP 36  ELA Median scale scores to be used will be between Level 2 and 3 also...score for grade 3 (305), grade 4 (303) and grade 5 (304). In Math Median Scale scores between 2 & 3. Grade 3 = 299; grade 4= 298, grade 5 = 306. will provide a counseling program that is preventative in nature, developmentally appropriate, and comprehensive. The school counselor will provide support in an effort to maximize student achievement. In addition, the school counselor will serve as an advocate for all children. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Basic emergency supplies, school supplies, Counseling services, Intervention Programs (i.e. RTI), After-school Programs and Saturday Academy, other educational support services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. At P.S. 157X we maintain and attractive, quiet building that reflects our focus on academics and the performing arts. Site tours are offered to applicants to correct any misconceptions of inner-city schools. Applications are scrutinized to note the talents and skills of the applicants. This information is used to offer highly qualified teachers a teaching environment that addresses their skills. In addition the information also affords us an opportunity to match teachers with specific grades/students/needs. Advertisements, job fairs, and college recruitment will be used to make applicants aware of the opportunities at P.S. 157X. In addition, mentors are assigned to support struggling and where necessary un-qualified teachers. Un-qualified teachers will work closely with the pupil personnel secretary and the Network HR individual to ensure proper documentation/assessment deadlines/requirements. We will be working with The New Teacher Center. They will train two coaches to be Mentors and support teachers with 1 and 2 year experience. New Teachers are also given buddy teachers who help them become adjusted to the building and to the curriculum itself. In addition, we work with the New Teacher Center in terms of mentoring and teacher retention. Professional development in Literacy, Math, Science, Social Studies and Classroom Management is provided by both the UFT teacher center in our building and by the Literacy Coaches( regular Literacy Coach and a Universal Literacy Coach (new NYCDOE Initiative), and Math Coach as well as the Assistant Principals and Principal. A mandated period of staff development has been built into every grades schedule so that all teachers receive staff development once a week. The staff development is often based on formal and informal teacher observations, teacher surveys of perceived needs and Department of Education mandates. 2018-19 CEP 40  Where needed, after formal and informal observations, staff development plans of action are attached to the feedback so that we can address the needs of all teachers on an individual basis. In addition to in-house training/staff development teachers are often sent to outside sources provided by the DOE 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development in Literacy, Math, Science, Social Studies and Classroom Management is provided by both the UFT teacher center in our building and by the Literacy Coaches and Math Coach as well as the Assistant Principals and Principal. In addition, the Principal has scheduled a mandatory Preparation period which is devoted to mandated professional development as part of our Professional Learning Communities. The Principal was able to schedule 6 preparation periods per week for each teacher so that one of those periods could be considered the one mandated preparation period. Additionally, most if not all of the teachers/grades have more than one day a week for common planning during which much collaboration among teachers both vertically and horizontally happens. Most professional development this year will be focused on learning how to implement the e Core Elements i.e. Coherent Curriculum, authentic Literacy and Effectively structure lesson. In addition new teachers and teachers at year 1 and year 2 will be supported through our new Teacher Induction program with Mentors and Mentees meeting, discussing and generally supporting the needs of the new teaching staff. All Professional Development is ongoing and very sequential so that what is learned during one workshop is a result of following through what was learned in prior workshops and ensuring through frequent informal observations and walk-throughs that implementation is being monitored. Professional Development will be done as per teacher needs. As per the Framework teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their school and classroom always moving towards school-wide academic improvement. Teachers have the opportunity to participate in professional development as stated above . All this is done within a culture of respect aimed at continuous improvement. Our students feel safe and supported and are challenged not just by their teachers but also by their peers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 CEP 41  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our pre-school students are transitioned from early childhood programs to the elementary school program in several ways. There are joint professional activities and much joint planning between the Pre-Kindergarten and the Kindergarten teachers which by extension helps the students to become more aware of and deal better with the elementary school program. Parent involvement is weekly and takes place in both Pre-Kindergarten and Kindergarten. Open Houses are frequent and parents join in the learning process with their children. During these activities parents sit and work on activities such as reading, building things, blocks, arts and crafts, and of course actual instruction/work such as phonics, etc. Early intervention services are offered to those students whose academic information and behavior information show a need for early intervention. The curriculum has been aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and also uses Understanding by Design in Social Studies and Science to further the learning process. In addition, Successful transition for the primary grades is embedded in the school continuity plan for the Lower Academy (Pre-K – 2) students. The curriculum is designed so that concepts spiral up through the grades providing background, familiarity and thus, student empowerment. The planning of instruction provides successful transition by utilizing common management signals, rebus task cards, editing marks, formats for blocks of instruction and room arrangements throughout the building. In this way, the “newness” of the next grades is not overwhelming as the student can recognize and manage many aspects of the instruction. Professional development is ongoing, training early childhood teachers to experience growth in the learning environments they provide as they guide students to greater independence and successful grade to grade transitions. Parent involvement is utilized to facilitate self-reliance through the acquisition of life skills (button, zip, tie, snap, knowing address, knowing phone number) learn simple multi-step directions and establish age-appropriate responsibilities at home as well as at school. Assessment is done through folder/portfolio review, teacher check-off lists, teacher assessment as well as Running Records to monitor that students have acquired the skills necessary for a smooth transition. Beginning in April, planned transition activities begin with Pre-Kindergarten students (those who are not already a part of the Pre-Kindergarten/Kindergarten Class) going to Kindergarten to work with them for at least one hour daily. Other activities such as discussions, class/grade visits, guest student speakers from the next grade, building tours, cross-grade trips, etc. are implemented 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are taught how to give assessment vehicles in order to provide information that will help to improve instruction as well as give a picture of student needs. During common preparation meetings teachers will be involved in this type of professional development and also have the opportunity to discuss their students work and progress with other staff members on the same grade. They will also format assessment and/or decide on what assessments will be used and for what type of data. Reflection on lessons planned and given will also be of great help in continuing to plan and deliver quality instruction. In addition, Professional Learning Communities professional development is also involved in giving further instruction and information to teachers concerning the how and why of assessments. This is done by administrators and by the school’s Data Specialist. In addition, all teachers had input into the Measure of Student Learning assessment they would be measured on and evaluated on in terms of student progress and academic improvement. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 2018-19 CEP 42  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A - 5E Sections 5A - 5E Sections 5A - 5E Sections 5A - 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 578,977.00 71,007.00 12,366.00 0 3,863,232.00 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 43  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Grove Hill - P.S. 157X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Parents Title I program is convened by first sending letters home informing the parents about the Title I meeting;  Phone blast one week before and the night before to remind parents of meeting;   Activities done for Title I are: Informational and hands-on workshops by areas, i.e. grades, areas/subjects; also LED sign with information as to time, date, etc discuss promotional criteria, testing, summer program criteria, School members responsible are: Teachers, Coaches, PTA,   Timeline: Done from October through May, when our Parent Summit takes place;  Steps to implement Title I are the following: Workshops in the school building, workshops at the District Office, Workshops are done in the morning and during Terrific Tuesdays and on Saturdays, Parents are given materials and other resources such as website mentioned above, common core curriculum/standards information, as well as workshops on the use of educational apps.  Accountability/Evaluations: Parent workshops are evaluated through surveys/hand-outs, informal conversations with parents in person or over the phone on concerns regarding workshops already given; When parents take advantage of workshops offered and become involved then students are more apt to perform better and increase their academic performance as a result.  All goes through the SLT during meetings/discussions. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 2018-19 CEP 45  Grove Hill – P.S. 157X, will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community conduct on-going parent workshops with the assistance of coaches and other staff members in reading, math and other content areas. Provide resources such as websites and community CBOs in order to ensure parents have at their disposal organizations, etc that can be of assistance to them;  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 2018-19 CEP 46  ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Parents are involved in the social emotional workshops as part of the school's goals. In addition, parents receive resources such as school data in reading and mathematics and are part of the final Parent Summit held in May of the current year. All school goals are addressed during parent workshops as well as discussed during SLT meetings. Parent Development: The school works with parents to increase leadership skills in the parents especially in the social emotional department and in dealing with school activities that deal with such things as public speaking and other areas of implementation that take into account how to better understand the school curriculum so that they can be partners in their child's education. 2018-19 CEP 47  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. According to the information available to the school and coaches we prepare a power-point presentation and handouts explaining the standards and what steps need to be taking to achieve the standards not only at the end of the year but in increments of quarters in order to see where the students are at that point. We also provide suggestions on how to assist their children at home with different activities such as cooking, conversations, community walks, current events, etc. We encourage the parents to monitor their children's achievement by talking to their children to see where their difficulties are and what they have learned throughout the day. At the same time, we ask the parents to have parent teacher conferences periodically and follow up throughout the school year. They can also meet with the parent coordinator and make appointments through phone calls or come in. The parent coordinator is well attuned with the strategies the coaches are employing with the parents. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Grove Hill – P.S. 157X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 48  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 49  Provide professional development for school personnel on effective strategies for engaging parents./families. We provide workshops for parents on data and the use of data including its impact on teacher practices and student achievement. We will ensure that parents are re-informed of the Competent Kids, Caring Communities Scholarship, its implementation, when and where possible involve parents in the actual program's components. In addition, we reach out to parents during parent-teacher conferences, school events and other activities. We create a team for planning and implementing family engagement in our school community to include teachers, parents, community representatives and principal. Create a list of of do-able activities and begin looking into implementation including workshops on data and social emotional health. Keep track of the parents whom we are able to contact and those that we cannot and - adapt strategies to engage"high priority families"such as those with children who may be having academic and/or social emotional difficulties. We will also provide parents with links to need services, in order to support hem with social emotional health issues as well as the instructional practices used by the teachers. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP 50  Provide workshops for parents on data driven instruction and on social emotional health activities/programs being implemented in the school to support the students and their families; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 52  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 30 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: In order to provide supplemental instruction for our K – 2 ENL/LEP students, P.S. 157X will implement an After-school program which will use the scientifically evidenced- based Zip Zoom Reading Program from Scholastic which includes the Zip Zoom English Software. The Zip Zoom Reading Program will support 30 k - 2 grade students in meeting the listening, speaking, reading and writing performance standards. We have been using Zip Zoom for several years and it works very well. Our After-School Program will provide instructional opportunities other than in the regular classroom. One Supervisor will monitor the implementation of the program. The Supervisor will be in charge of ensuring fidelity in program implementation as well as ensuring that all students are picked up on time and will be available in case of any emergency which may come up during an after-school program. The Supervisor will work from 2:30- 4:45 pm which will include supervising the students during the snack period in the student cafeteria. The Supervisor will work at no cost to this program. Target Population: 30 ESL students from grade K - 2 to include beginners and intermediate students. Number of Groups: There will be two groups: One group of 15 students who are beginners and one group consisting of 15 students who are considered intermediate as per the NYSESLAT. Number of teachers: There will be two certified ESL teachers, one for each group. Instruction of both groups will be done simultaneously by each teacher in different rooms. In addition, there will be one other Content Area Teacher (Technology), who will work with the teachers in staff development and with the students using the technology part of the Zip Zoom English Software. The Technology Teacher will plan together with the ESL Teachers to ensure that there is consistency of instructional ESL strategies and of the program itself. The students will be 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information instructed for approximately 2 hours each on the days specified below. One hour each of the days will be given over to the students and teacher working together with the Technology teacher to provide the technology part of this program. Days, time of Sessions: The program will run on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:45 - 4:45 with the students being served a snack from 2:20 - 2:45. Pick up will be in the student cafeteria. Total Number of Sessions: The Program will run for approximately 32 sessions (days) for a total of 15 weeks. Materials to be used: The program will use the Zip Zoom Reading Program which is research-based and which includes the Zip Zoom English Software. In addition, notebooks, copy paper, chart tablets, etc. will be used to facilitate the implementation of the program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale, Continued: The professional development activities for staff participating in this After-School Program, will take place during 15 weeks/ 32 sessions. Teachers will receive a review training on the use of Zip Zoom by the technology teacher who has been doing this for the past 12 years. Lesson planning and other support will be given to the teachers through our own Literacy Coach and if necessary our Math Coach. Days, Time of Sessions: The teachers who will be teaching in this program will meet for staff development for 5 sessions on the following dates: 12/3/18, 12/10/18, 01/14/19, 01/21/19 and 01/28/19. The teachers will meet for 5 Sessions to review and discuss ESL methodology and the implementation of Zip Zoom. The training will give a comprehensive overview of methods to accelerate language and literacy acquisition in the early grades. Target Population: Two ESL Teachers. Number of Groups: One. Materials to be Used: The professional development component(s) of the Zip Zoom Reading program. Since teachers have already been 2018-19 CEP 55  Part C: Professional Development trained in the use of this program staff development will mainly focus on review of the components of Zip Zoom. There will be additional review of “Making Sense: Small Group Comprehension Lessons for English Language Learners” by Juli Kendall to supplement the information they will be studying regarding Reading and Language Learning and how best to support the students. Teachers will review/learn how to put emphasis on the acquisition of academic language and skills, while they build on the students’ very varied background experiences. The teachers will also take into account the different cultural perspectives of the students through collaborative interaction and integration of oral and literacy skills. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: RATIONALE: Decades of research show that when parents are involved in their children's education they have: Higher grades, test scores, and graduation rates; Better school attendance; Increased motivation, better self-esteem; Lower rates of suspension; Decreased use of drugs and alcohol and Fewer instances of violent behavior. We expect to reach the parents of all 30 students who will be attending the program. In addition, parents and students will be taken to the Museo Del Barrio in order to tie with their cultural heritage. Trip bus will be taken and teachers, parents and students will go on the trip to the Museo Del Barrio. As stated above the trip to the Museo Del Barrio will tie in with the students cultural heritage which we want to respect. During the trip the teachers will point out to the students different points of interests as well as once inside the Museum, the person doing the walk-through with the students will be able to speak about the 2018-19 CEP 56  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities different paintings and other cultural items of Hispanic origin adding an extra layer of learning for the students and parents. The trip will be organized during the day and will not require per-session payment for teachers. How Parents will be notified: * Parents will be informed of parent activities as well as the requirements of the program and of their rights to be involved (through meetings, letters, newsletters, conferences,radio, newspaper, phone calls, online, or other means); * Materials and training to help parents work with their child to improve achievement in ESL; * Use of parent volunteers; * Parents will be involved in the preparation of the trip and will accompany the students; * After-school workshops on ESL activities that will support their children in school will be given; Trip will be taken during the school day. Teachers and parents will accompany students on said trip. The only expenses tied to the trip will be $700 for bus transportation and $250.00 for entrance fee for students for a total of $950.00 which does not exceed the 10% limit of the total allocation. The total allocation for Title III is $12,366.00 No staff other than Title III authorized ENL certified providers will be funded with Title III funds. Funds, however, are basically consolidated so other funds may be used to support the program. Schedule and Duration: * Workshops for parents will be held for 1 hour each and will take place on December 11, 2018, December 18, 2018, January 15th, 2019, January 22rd, 2019 and January 29th, 2019 during the implementation of the program. Topics to be covered will be (although not limited to): Reading with your child Homework help, Technology in ESL; ESL activities to support your child at home, etc. Name of Provider: Mr. Michael Martin, Technology Teacher and ESL Teachers 2018-19 CEP 57 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A n/a N/A n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a N/A n/a 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name Grove Hill School Borough Bronx School Number 157 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ramona A. Duran Coach Emmeline Roopchand ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jane Carlson Teacher/Subject Area Agnes Zodiatis/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Brittany Crawford/ENL Related-Service Provider Brenda Velez Superintendent Eliza Alvarez Assistant Principal Katrina Fennell Coach Virginia Niles School Counselor Jamal Horsley Parent Irma Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Ana Miranda Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 660 2018-19 CEP 59 Total number of ELLs 71 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.76%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 K N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis N/A/ N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 3 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 5 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 6 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 7 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 8 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 9 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 10 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 11 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 12 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We regularly use running records, spelling and sight word inventories, high frequency word tests, letter- sound-id, and concepts of print assessments to assess the literacy skills of young ELLs. These types of assessments provide insight into what strategies students use or don’t use in their independent reading while also helping teachers assess the types of errors in reading students make including errors of meaning, syntax, and visualization. From this we can effectively assess a new student’s prior literacy development. Knowing a student’s independent reading level can allow us to match a student’s abilities with his or her interests and help them to effectively become better readers and writers and active participants in their own academic development. We have found through assessing our newcomer ELLs with the reading level assessment, that they often use picture support in reading grade level text. Also, we notice that young ELLs can notice and repeat a pattern when it is given in a story with one line of text. ELLs understand concepts of print which suggests emergent literacy comprehension in the native language. For this reason, our instruction of ELLs is grounded in accessing background or prior knowledge with a basis in picture support for building literacy skills. In addition, ENL teachers keep regular anecdotal notes, 2018-19 CEP 60  conference notes, and informal assessments on the daily work and progress of ELLs. All of the assessments mentioned above provide insight to ENL teachers and classroom teachers to determine a student's literacy skills and needs. For students with special needs, the student’s IEP is regularly used as an assessment tool and starting point for instruction. Students are assessed through teacher observation and teacher made tests based on the needs and goals expressed in their IEP. ENL teachers also directly assess students’ progress in specific shared readings with diagnostic pre and post reading comprehension assessments from Pearson Longman Cornerstone, a program developed by Pearson Education specifically designed to meet the needs of ELLs. Additionally, NYSESLAT results are examined and assessed yearly to determine an ELL’s academic needs in terms of listening, speaking, reading, or writing in English Language acquisition. Classroom teachers are provided with the ELL student’s NYSESLAT proficiency level, along with an explanation of the scores to aid in their teaching and tier I instructional choices. ENL teachers have access to all of the ELLs' data, allowing them to look at trends and assess the needs of ELLs in all areas with state exam results and assessments that have been entered into computer data bases. These are the F&P scores for the ELLs: 5th Grade R = 1 S = 1 T = 2 U = 1 V = 2 4th Grade F = 2 I = 1 J = 1 K = 1 O = 1 Q = 1 R = 2 3rd Grade B = 3 C = 1 H = 2 J = 1 K = 1 M = 2 N = 2 O = 2 2nd Grade B -1 C -1 D - 1 J- 1 L - 1 M - 7 First Grade Emergent - 1 A - 1 B - 1 C - 1 2018-19 CEP 61  E - 2 F - 1 G - 1 Kindergarten Emergent - 1 A - 2 B - 4 C - 1 D - 2 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To ensure this effort is supported, we have structures in place; these structures include weekly grade level common prep planning sessions, weekly PLCs (professional learning community), and time during professional development hours on Monday and Tuesday. During these sessions, we are able to collectively analyze the data we have collected on our students and reflect on whether or not changes need to be made. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? ENL teachers are reflective about their curriculum and instructional style on a daily basis. At professional development trainings, teachers are encouraged to share out and learn about new best practices for the instruction of different subgroups of ELLs. Where no progress is evident throughout the year, or year to year, ENL teachers, classroom teachers, coaches, and support staff will look at data in regards to individual students to identify their areas of need and where the curriculum or practice can be improved upon. This year, we also closely examined student work to make sure that our outcomes matched what was being taught and/or the skill the student was working on. Communication with the school’s data specialist and testing coordinator is pivotal in the analysis of data gathered from periodic assessments, summative assessments, and baselines that we use to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need. Communication between these staff members and staff working directly with ELLs is established and maintained regularly. Assessments are examined on a regular basis in order to ensure that ELLs are making measurable progress. We saw from examinig the 2016 NYSESLAT, that a high percentage of our ELLs made Annual Measureable Acheivement Objectives 1 and 2, contributing positively to our school’s AYP goal. We access an array of curricular choices and materials such as ReadyGEN for literacy, Go Math! For math, and Cornerstone (for ELLs) to engage ELLs in content area instruction with supports. ENL teachers have integrated and aligned social studies, science, Cornerstone (literacy) with ReadyGen to create a cohesive curriculum and daily lesson plans for ENL instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Just as we analyze formative and curriculum-based assessments, we have the same structures in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered. After collecting the summative data, any possible interventions are discussed, analyzed, and implemented during the same sessions mentioned above: during common preps, PLCs, and professional development time. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We understand that ELLs who struggle do not necessarily need special education services. For this reason, it is important to take a step-by-step approach when serving struggling ELLs. This includes; examining achievement at the classroom level, drawing on multiple sources of information, analyzing data through a language acquisition lens, and designing and implementing targeted supplemental supports. We use the RTI guide entitled “Creating an RTI Model for ELLs’ Academic Success” to guide our practice when determining which ELLs are eligible for extra services (in addition to the mandated minutes of ENL instruction) and in determining appropriate supports. The foundation for the achievement of ELLs is in strong 2018-19 CEP 62  Tier 1 instruction. We specifically develop language and literacy across the curriculum by aligning ReadyGEN, Cornerstone, and the content areas in cohesive units for ELLs. We also focus on teaching complex thinking through the adoption of Webb's Depth of Knowledge classroom questioning techniques. If it is determined that an ELL needs more support than strong Tier I instruction and their mandated minutes of ENL support, the ENL teacher, literacy coach and the child's classroom teacher meet to create a plan for Tier II or III instruction for that student. A targeted plan might include native language support and instruction, support in writing development by exposing the student to many types of writing purposes, genres, and formats, using the student's present language (dictation) to support writing, constant interaction with other students in the four modalities, and employing the use of predictable, patterned or rhythmic books. A strong RtI plan will also include constant progress monitoring for all participating students. RtI tiers II and III instructional plans are created individually according the student and his or her needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns can be expressed across grade levels and proficiency levels in examining the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. When ELLs are exposed to strong programs with great teachers, we find that from year to year, they perform in a predictable way on the NYSESLAT. The majority of students who score eligible for ENL services with the NYSITELL in kindergarten, achieve an Expanding or higher on the NYSESLAT in the Spring. From year to year, ELLs generally move up one proficiency level.We can see that our students are making Measurable Achievement Objectives 1 and 2 from this data. We see this with most of our ELLs with few exceptions, namely those students with a known disability. Predictably, we also find that ELLs score higher in the areas of listening and speaking than reading and writing. Listening and speaking are the modalities that a typical learner develops first. The Fall 2017 NYSITELL score were: Kindergarten Entering = 3 Emerging = 2 Transitioning = 1 Expanding = 3 1st (No students have taken the NYSITELL yet.) 2nd: Entering = 1 student Transitioning =1 3rd: Transitioning =1 4th: Entering = 1 Emerging = 1 Transitioning = 1 5th (No students have taken the NYSITELL yet.) The Spring 2016 NYSESLAT Scores were as following: Students now in 1st: Entering = 0 Emerging = 0 Transitioning = 2 Expanding = 5 Commanding = 2 Students now in 2nd: Entering = 2 Emerging = 1 Transitioning = 3 Expanding = 2 2018-19 CEP 63  Commanding = 0 Students now in 3rd: Entering = 0 Emerging = 1 Transitioning = 3 Expanding = 4 Commanding = 2 Students now in 4th: Entering = 0 Emerging = 4 Transitioning = 4 Expanding = 3 Commanding =1 Students now in 5th: Entering = 0 Emerging = 5 Transitioning = 2 Expanding = 6 Commanding = 2 Students who scored Entering or Emerging on the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT are either newcomers or have IEPs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? When it comes to outcome assessments such as the NYSESLAT, the same structures are in place to disseminate our findings and make any necessary program adjustments; these structures are having available time during common preps, PLCs, and professional development to analyze data and reflect on the data. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The primary materials used in our Freestanding ENL program are chosen by the certified ENL teachers, Ms. Carlson and Ms. Zodiatis, which correspond to each grade’s curriculum and students’ needs. Instruction is based on theme units that address the basics of content areas such as social studies, math, science, and English language arts. The units consist of lessons which involve the development of the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing). For example, big books are used for read alouds while fiction and non-fiction texts are used for independent and guided reading. The ENL teachers also applies relevant components of the ReadyGEN Literacy model with students by using essential questions, Webb's depth of knowledge questioning techniques and levels, guided practice, independent practice, and share time elements of instruction. Students also actively engage in partner and small group work where they have opportunities to develop their listening and speaking skills and push their thinking. We use a literacy program from Pearson Longman called, Cornerstone as the primary form of materials for English Language Literacy development. Cornerstone is an English Language literacy program that includes textbooks with grade appropriate (ability, interest, and content area) independent stories. The Cornerstone program is inquiry based utilizing a big question at the start of each of the six units and guiding questions throughout each 2018-19 CEP 64  reading. Cornerstone books on all levels utilize high levels of picture support in a mixture of fiction and non-fiction readers. ENL teachers give ELLs an opportunity to listen, speak, read, and write in English on a daily basis of ENL instruction with this literacy program. These independent readers and practice books are supplemented by ENL teachers with alphabet charts, leveled books, activity sheets, graphic organizers, content area textbooks, and internet resources to integrate the content areas. For Kindergarten, ENL teachers teach phonics using Fundations as the foundational program, adding and omitting specific elements based on student need. ENL teachers have also created their own supplemental materials to better support the ELLs. ENL teachers spent time over the summer planning units which integrate and align Cornerstone (with built-in supports for ELLs), goals and benchmarks from ReadyGEN, and the current Social Studies and Science units of study for the corresponding grade levels in order to meet the needs of ELLs and help them reach appropriate benchmarks. The method of instruction is differentiated to meet the needs of individual students through native language support and the creation of class charts for student reference, and small group instruction and support. The school as a whole utilizes the ReadyGEN curriculum as the primary form of literacy instruction for all students, including ELLs in general education classes. In addition, as a result of the Common Core Learning Standards, ENL instruction will focus more heavily on the use of non-fiction texts to guide ELLs in literacy progress. As we are a school community that constantly moitors ELL student progress, we adjusted our instructional planning to supplement Cornerstone and make deliberate choices about which units to include and discontinue this year as they address the Common Core, grade level expectations, and current social studies and science units of study. This integration of themes across classes will aid in language reinforcement for ELLs. ENL instruction is delivered in Integrated and Standalone programs. For the upcoming 2017-2018 school year, the Standalone ENL program will remain the same as it has in the past where students are pulled out of their regular class to work in small groups in the ENL classroom. Next fall, we will schedule Integrated ENL in all ELL classrooms based on students' mandated minutes of service. As per the CR Part 154.2, Ms. Carlson and Ms. Zodiatis will be providing Integrated ENL in all of the designated ELL classes in each grade including both self contained special education classes, ICT classes, and general education l classes. Ms. Carlson will be providing Integrated ENL to ELLs in grades K, 1, and 2 while Ms. Zodiatis will be providing Integrated ENL services to students in grades 3, 4, and 5. ENL teachers will provide Integrated ENL during the literacy block and content areas to support ELLs in science and social studies with appropriate literacy supports. Additionally, a third ENL teacher, Ms. Crawford provides Integrated ENL through Art and Social Studies once a week to all of the designated "ELL classes" in grades Kindergarten through Fifth grade. Entering and Emerging ELLs receive ENL support from fully certified ENL teachers for 360 minutes/week. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive support from fully certified ENL teachers for 180 minutes/week. Commanding ELLs will continue to receive services for an additional two years of 90 minutes/week. Standalone ENL groups are created by the ENL teachers based on grade and proficiency level. There is one ENL teacher, Ms. Carlson, responsible for instruction of ELLs in grades K, 1, 2. There is one ENL teacher, Ms. Zodiatis, responsible for instruction of ELLs in grades 3, 4, and 5. In general, students are grouped homogeneously according to grade and proficiency level except in the case of push-in blocks where mixed level ability ELLs are supported in literacy or math development in their class. As of 2016-2017, all ELLs were placed in one class on each grade level; each grade has a designated ELL class where all of the ELLs in that particular grade (all English proficiency levels including F-ELLs) are placed. This made schdueling easier for both Standalone and Integrated ENL. In the past, ENL teachers have had mixed students of differing proficiency levels to accommodate student schedules and behavioral concerns. In one case, a second grade ELL in a self-contained special education class is in a group with first graders to accommodate the student's lunch schedule and ability level. Also, some first grade ELLs who receive speech services are picked up separately from other first grade ELLs of the same proficiency level so that they may remain in a smaller group for more one on one support, and so as not to conflict with the speech pull-out schedule. ENL teachers revisit their schedules at least once a month or as conflicts arise, to make sure that they are optimizing their time with ELLs and making the strongest scheduling choices allowable. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 65  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per parent choice, we currently offer a Freestanding ENL program at PS 157. The questions in this section will be answered accordingly as they pertain to our Freestanding ENL program.a. Classroom teachers, speech providers, and academic support providers are encouraged to communicate with ENL staff in the creation and maintenance of the ENL Standalone and Integrated ENL program schedules. ENL teachers create a schedule for their students as to when they will be pulled out of their classes for Standalone, meanwhile working with teachers to schedule integrated ENL sessions (co-teaching). The schedule is created using a model of 45 minute blocks. As per the CR Part 154.2, Commanding ELLs are provided with 90 minutes of ENL instruction/week through two 45 minute sessions. Transitioning and Expanding level students are pulled out for 4 periods/week (totaling 180 minutes). Entering and Emerging level students receive ENL instruction for 8 periods/week (totaling 360 minutes). This schedule is approved by administrative staff and distributed to classroom teachers. A student's proficiency level determines how many minutes a student receives in Standalone and Integrated ENL. As mentioned above, ELL students receive 360 minutes per week of ENL support from ENL certified staff if they are in the Entering and Emerging levels of English language proficiency. ELL students receive 180 minutes per week of ENL support from ENL certified staff if they are at the Transitioning or Expanding level of English language proficiency. Students receive 90 minutes per week if they are at the Commanding level. These levels are determined by the NYSITELL scores for Kindergarteners and newcomers, and the NYSESLAT for currently enrolled ELLs. The ENL teachers have access to ATS in order to look at NYSESLAT scores at the beginning of the school year and as new ELLs are transferred or enrolled in our school. ENL staff members also have access to examine ELA test scores and grade level progress of ELLs. This aids in the forming of ENL groups and for the purpose of driving instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers understand the rigor of the Common Core Learning Standards. We specifically look at the language strand of standards as expectations and guidelines for all students, including ELLs. For this reason, ENL Standalone instruction is based heavily in English Language literacy development with integration of appropriate grade level content areas of social studies and science. Instruction is delivered in English with 25% Native Language Support in the way of teacher translation, student to student translation and native language support, and literacy tools such as books, picture dictionaries, and translation dictionaries are available for student use. To support our ELLs, we created a Native Language Support Center Library in the ENL classroom. This library includes books in English and Spanish as well as some bilingual books. ELLs and F-ELL students can access this library at any time as long as ENL teachers are present in the classroom. These books are used for instructional purposes where appropriate and students are able to regularly check books out of the library to read at home with parents or anyone at home who can offer literacy support. These supports enrich content and make it comprehensible to newcomers. We will continue the use of a Native Language Support Center in the ENL classroom again next year. Students are generally pulled out for Standalone instruction and support during designated content area instructional periods. Integrated ENL is provided to the designated ELL classes during literacy or math blocks, also during content area instruction. Regarding content area instruction, ELLs receive at least four academic periods of social studies and science instruction by certified personnel, common branch teachers, as well as ENL certified teachers. Content area teachers and classroom teachers are encouraged to communicate with ENL staff for information regarding the best practices for ELLs. In room 415 there is a binder labeled "TESOL Best Practices" which includes the latest news and strategies for working with ELLs. This binder is available to any interested staff member who is responsible for the instruction of ELLs. Included here are checklists to guide instruction for ELLs and benchmarks for instruction. Also available is information on the 6 methods of scaffolding instruction which are; modeling, bridging, schema-building, contextualization, text representation, and metacognitive development. Also included are checklists for programming that meet the needs of ELLs and model activities for language learners. In September, ENL teachers distribute information to classroom teachers regarding the ELLs' NYSESLAT scores from the previous spring. This helps the classroom teacher to identify their ELLs, make deliberate decisions about inviting ELLs to participate in After school and Saturday school programs, plan differentiation activities and supports in their lessons, and form groups immediately at the onset of the school year. ENL teachers routinely encourage classroom and 2018-19 CEP 66  content area teachers to support ELLs by using graphic representations of objects and concepts wherever possible as well as gestures and movements. Finally, classroom and content area teachers are invited to attend yearly summer institute trainings, faculty conference days, and several professional development sessions throughout the year, led by ENL staff to aid in their understanding of English language development in ELLs and ideas for how to enrich their language experience. For example, ELLs are given an opportunity to speak in group discussions in ENL daily with questions and topics of high interest and prompted with background knowledge. Classroom and content area staff are asked to monitor the participation of ELLs in verbal discussions in their classes. In addition to receiving appropriate instruction in the mandated content areas, students also receive instruction in the arts with keyboards and violin. ELLs also have access to the computer lab with their classes as scheduled and by appointment with the technology teacher and librarian. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As stated before, newly enrolled students whose home language is indicated as Spanish are tested first with the NYSITELL to determine their English proficiency and then tested with the Spanish LAB to determine their native language proficiency (if the home language is Spanish and the student tests below the cut scores for the NYSITELL). Sometimes ENL staff will informally use the Spanish LAB to assess a student's native language skills. Students who speak Arabic are asked to read resources (an Arabic alphabet chart and teacher made classroom chart written in Arabic) found or created from the internet to assess their native language skills. We also have an Arabic speaking paraprofessional who can help assess the native language skills of these students. He is able to assess their speaking and writing skills. Also available in the ENL classroom are resources in French. In the case of older French-speaking students, Ms. Carlson was able to assess their grammar skills through the use of Grammaire raisonnee, a grammar book containing excersizes in French. Younger French speaking students are asked to read alphabet charts or other teacher created materials from the internet or picture dictionaries (which we have available in Spanish, French, and Arabic). Finally, we also have picture charts posted in the ENL classroom containing words and pictures in Arabic, French, Spanish, Chinese, and English for students to refer to or for the purpose of assessing native language skills. In the upper-grades, through the internet we have access to Go Math! resources and translations of lessons and work in Spanish. For other languages that we have not anticipated, there is a wealth of information and resources to be found on the internet. One resource that we use regularly is google translate, which has the option of reading translated words and phrases aloud from the computer or iPhone. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Ms. Carlson attended a two-day SIFE training with Ms. Rachel Hoff that was highly informative. At this time, we do not have any students who can be considered SIFE, but we have had SIFE students in the past and are prepared to work with this population and can adjust our instruction to meet their needs. SIFE students receive ENL instruction in small groups for an extra academic period than peers in their same proficiency level. They receive a lot of one on one support in the classroom and in ENL in all tasks. ENL teachers will meet with the parents of SIFE students to explain and guide parents in the process of enrollment and expectations. SIFE students can be provided with regular progress communication home through the ESL teacher or parent coordinator. Special accommodations are made for any SIFE students in increased adult support for all tasks, one on one support where it is possible, translation for all classroom tasks, extra time to complete work, and regular access to resources such as bilingual dictionaries and picture dictionaries in our Native Language Support Library along with hands on activities and visuals. We rely heavily on the explicit instruction of routines to help the SIFE student adjust to school social, behavioral, and academic norms. To do this, each SIFE student is paired with a 'buddy' in his or her class who also attends ENL classes. In the past, SIFE students worked one on one with a bilingual parent volunteer two days per week in literacy development. We will consider this arrangement again this year as volunteers become available and as the need arises. In addition, SIFE students get in-class Tier 1 support from teachers and other service providers who can work with students at risk. The teacher works to lower students’ anxiety and affective filter that can have negative effects on students’ learning and achievement. Appropriate mixed ability grouping is used for SIFE students in order for SIFE students to be exposed to strategies used by more advanced students. Also, they can look at their peers as models of language and behavior. 2018-19 CEP 67  Lastly, SIFE students are encouraged to participate in Title III Afterschool and Saturday programs. SIFE students are also recommended for RtI services. b. Newcomers are placed in smaller groups whenever possible for more supported instruction in ENL and literacy development. Readings are specifically chosen to tap into students’ prior knowledge and interest level with high levels of picture support. For newcomers, lessons are focused on oral language development. As with SIFE students, mixed ability grouping is sometimes implemented for newcomers. However, it is conducted carefully based on the newcomers’ proficiency levels. Because students are required to take the ELA after one year, students in this category in grades 3-5 are given opportunities for test preparation in their classes to expose them to test taking strategies and the layout and expectations for the test. Whenever possible, scheduling is done to allow the student to remain in his or her class for their regular literacy block, and only pulled out for small group Standalone ENL instruction during a second literacy period for individualized support and strategy work. Instruction for Newcomers in the primary grades has a heavy focus on speech development. Students are encouraged to participate verbally with engaging poems, songs, daily oral language practice routines, as well as heavily patterned high-interest text, and visual aids that correspond to relevant vocabulary. c. Developing ELLs are instructed by using a variety of visual aids and carefully modeled step-by-step instruction. In addition, the four language modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing are implemented as well as the integration of the content areas. Groups are created carefully to reflect students’ grade levels and English Language proficiency and are grouped homogeneously where possible and appropriate. Readings and teaching tools are selected to reflect the appropriate grade level social studies and science content as well as student interest. A variety of strategies are implemented in the ENL classroom such as scaffolding, building background knowledge, introduction strategies, and modeling. The inquiry model, using questions geared towards a particular subject to tap into a students background knowledge, is an integral part of instruction for Developing ELLs. Class charts are created regularly for student reference and student work is displayed to demonstrate progress and show models of growth and proficiency around the ENL room. These students also work on test preparation for the ELA, Math test, NYSESLAT, and Science exam (in the case of fourth graders) to help lower any testing anxiety or confusion associated with standardized exams so that the student may work to his or her potential. ENL teachers rely on direct instruction of English grammar and usage in addition to high interest content area books to drive instruction for this group. Minilessons are chosen based on collaboration with the classroom teacher to target this student's needs. At the beginning of the year, these students' NYSESLAT scores are analyzed for their areas of strength and weakness, so that is the area that can be focused on in ENL instruction. For example, a student with a proficient speaking score, but an emergent level writing score, needs to develop his or her writing skills in order to be considered English Proficient. Finally, ENL teachers will use more non-fiction text next year to guide instruction as this more closely resembles the expectations of state tests (including the NYSESLAT) as well as real-life expectations for these students. Nonfiction units of study in literacy in ENL will revolve around a social studies or science units corresponding to students’ grade level curricular needs. d. We are prepared to work with Long Term, ELLs. In addition to the mandated ENL instructional minutes, other academic supports are explored. Other programs to aid the students’ academic growth might be suggested, discussed, or offered in addition to Freestanding ENL. If not, the teacher assesses the students’ weaknesses and focuses on improving them accordingly. These students are similarly placed in groups reflecting their grade and proficiency level. Wherever possible, Long Term ELLs are given an increased amount of one-on–one adult support in grade level tasks. Communication is maintained between the teachers, parent coordinator, and parents of the student in order to support student progress. These students are granted resources to use at home and are invited to participate in Title III Afterschool and Saturday programs as they are available to support their academic goals and English Language acquisition. Other available programs include SETSS and RtI. Students in this category are looked at on an individual basis and a determination of what supports to use are planned in collaboration with the Administration, ENL teachers, classroom teachers, IEP team, and support staff. These students are also granted time for test preparation for the NYSESLAT, ELA, Math and Science tests (as fourth graders) to help address testing anxiety and confusion related to the test in order to receive an accurate snapshot of the child's progress at the time of the test. e. There is a plan in place at PS 157 for continuing transitional support for ELLs reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT. Teachers are made aware of the presence of these students in their classes and ENL teachers provide 90 minutes/week of Integrated ENL in the former ELL's classrooms as well as in social studies with Ms. Crawford once a week. They are held to the same expectations as their monolingual peers in their classes. Additionally, extra materials are given to the students’ teachers, additional communication is established with the parent, and if determined by the teacher and ENL teachers, the students are pulled out for extra help for continuing transitional support. These students are granted the use of a translated version of the NYS Math Test and Fourth Grade Science Test (for up to two years after testing Proficient on the NYSESLAT). These students are invited to visit the ENL classroom and teachers whenever it is appropriate to do so with permission from their classroom 2018-19 CEP 68  teacher. Students have access to the native language library as well. They will also be invited to participate in Afterschool AIS and ENL programs, provided there is funding for these programs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For instructional strategies appropriate for ELL-SWDs, ENL teachers regularly consult with self-contained special education teachers. Teachers also read the student's goals on the IEP to make sure that direct instruction is aligned with the specific student's needs. For example, ELL-SWDs who need support in retelling will be exposed to the same text many times to support development in this area as well as language acquisition. As is the case with most ELLs, ELL-SWDs struggle most with reading and writing. Therefore ENL teachers will provide daily opportunities for ELL-SWDs to engage in reading and writing activities to strengthen these skills. As with all ELLs, instruction should be scaffolded, specifically through careful modeling, with plenty of time for student practice. Instructional strategies include; modeling, bridging, schema-building, contextualization, text representation, and metacognitive development for ELL-SWDs. Materials will be grade level texts, the students' own writing narratives, nonfiction decodable texts, nonfiction read alouds, and plenty of picture support in all areas. Regular communication with special education teachers, IEP teachers, the IEP team, and regular monitoring of IEPs on SESIS is essential for these students. Additionally, the ENL teacher takes students according to the IEP mandates. For students who are identified as entitled to ENL services and for whom the IEP indicates "ESL only", teachers carefully place the student in a group which matches the student’s social and academic needs. This year, ENL staff serviced self-contained special education students through Integrated ENL. In the past, both ENL teachers co-taught small group of special needs ELLs in order to maximize the amount of professional academic support to this group. At this time, this scheduling is not possible to accommodate a co-teaching ELL with special needs group, but it is an idea that will be revisited again next year based on the number of ELLs in this category. A curriculum is created for groups of students which contain ELLs with special needs, including daily scaffolded minilessons and daily writing activities. This curriculum also relies heavily on direct explicit instruction, careful modeling, and extended practice with learned literacy strategies, and reinforcing what the students' needs are according to his or her IEP and needs in the classroom. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs. First, the student's IEP clearly states the differentiated curricular goals for each ELL-SWD. These IEPs can be viewed by all staff members work with the student in the SESIS system. Through the use of SESIS, all teachers who work with a student have the ability to work toward the same goals with that student. ENL teachers regularly confer with classroom teachers and related service providers (speech, RtI, SETSS) for concerns regarding ELL-SWDs. One concern is scheduling. ENL teachers provide services to ELL-SWDs in their classroom with the classroom teacher through Integrated ENL. Otherwise, the ENL teacher will service this student with Standalone ENL during the second literacy block or social studies block (as long as social studies content is being taught in the ENL room). As stated earlier, instruction for ELL-SWDs is flexible to accommodate the individual student's needs in the way of modeling, bridging, schema-building, contextualization, text representation, and metacognitive development. To meet each ELL-SWDs' needs, ENL teachers regularly look at test results and use information in ATS, as well as regular review of a student's IEP in SESIS. In order for ELL-SWDs to interact with their non-disabled peers, flexible programming is encouraged. For example, this year ELL-SWDs in grade 2 were placed in a group of general education first and second grader ELLs for Standalone ENL instruction. This group met four times a week with the ENL teacher allowing those students to interact with their general education peers every day. In the past, some ELL-SWDs in grades 3 and 4 were enrolled in our extended day program in a group of general education students. This group met 2 times/week. Classroom teachers of SWDs attempt to integrate students with a corresponding general education class for some portion of the day depending on their skill level in a particular subject. For example, one fifth grade ELL-SWD joins a general education fifth grade class for the literacy block. Other classes of SWDs take physical education with a general education class. Finally, for grade level events like field days, field trips, assemblies, and contests, SWD classes (including those classes with ELL-SWDs) join their general education peers for the duration of the event. Finally, the IEP team at PS 157X places all SWDs in the least restrictive environment. 2018-19 CEP 69  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. There is extensive targeted intervention for ELLs in all academic areas. As stated above, the ENL curriculum is heavily grounded in building the students’ English language literacy development and proficiency. It is focused on direct instruction of English language norms in speaking, listening, reading and writing. Teachers deliver direct instruction daily in grammar, talk moves, spelling, punctuation, and vocabulary development. This is all done with integration of the content areas in the way of carefully selected fiction and nonfiction readings of grade level social studies and science stories and narratives. Sometimes these texts are pulled directly from our Cornerstone curriculum. Other times, texts are chosen from ReadyGEN, the ENL library, school library, or Teacher Center with the support of classroom teachers and Teacher Center representatives or coaches. Students are encouraged to explore and discuss these topics with one another in daily group discussions. This helps the teacher to assess prior knowledge and interest level in the content area. Many interventions are a result of open lines of communication and articulation throughout the school building between ENL teachers, classroom teachers, and content area teachers. Where it is necessary, appropriate, and possible, an ENL teacher will push-in with a class during science, social studies, or math instruction. In the past, the K,1,2 ENL teacher was able to pull-out a group of third, fourth, and fifth grade newcomers for targeted translation instruction once a week. A high interest book was read to the students as a read aloud in Spanish first (the students’ native language) and then in English to aid in students’ comprehension of learned literacy skills and strategies. Students in this group received additional one-on-one adult support and guided practice with literacy development. This added support will be considered next year as scheduling allows and student needs dictate. Currently these students have been integrated into ENL Standalone groups according to their proficiency level and CR-154 mandates. Articulation of ELL needs is also communicated to additional support staffers in the building. Additional staff members working with ELLs include one monolingual physical therapist, two occupational therapists, one bilingual SETSS teacher and three speech therapists, two of whom are bilingual. Student needs and available services are regularly discussed with support staff and classroom teachers on an individual or small group level. Instruction in all content areas is discussed and targeted to individual student needs and aligned with Common Core Learning Standards. For math instruction, the ENL teachers work very closely with the math coach to develop strategies for ELLs and their general education teachers. We have a limited number of math textbooks and homework books in Spanish that can be provided to students whose home language is Spanish. This way parents can assist their child with the homework. Also, new teachers have scheduled meeting times with the math coach to discuss instructional practices (including the best practices for ELLs). Veteran teachers are invited to meet with the math coach at any time. Our coaches (math and literacy) also regulary run weekly common preps, PLCs and PDs with classroom and content area teachers to instruct teachers in the best practices for ELLs or to answer questions or provide extra resources. Best practices for ELLs in math include, but are not limited to: providing extra time for tasks, explicit and targeted instruction, deconstructing word problems and math terminology, heterogeneous group and partner work (ELLs have an opportunity to work with monolingual peers as models), additional teacher or adult support for instruction and tasks, student or teacher translation, translated resources, instructions and questions repeated. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Every year at PS 157, current ENL programs and offerings are examined and assessed based on student need, teacher availability, scheduling, and parent choice. After speaking to parents at the parent orientation meetings and parent/teacher conferences, ENL teachers assess the parents’ articulated feelings in regards to the education of their ELL child. It has been found that parents overwhelmingly prefer the current Freestanding ENL program that is in place. Also, parents often articulate a desire for additional afterschool and Saturday programs for their child. These are always considered as part of the ENL yearly review based on budgetary availability of funds to support additional programs. In the past, a dual language program was considered in the school for the 2006/2007 school year, however the number of ELLs along with parent support was not sufficient to support this type of program. In addition, we have offerred an afterschool program for ELL parents to learn English and gain English Language proficiency in the modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. Again, this is considered as budgetary opportunities arise. In general, as ENL staff devoted to the social and academic growth of our ELL population, we hope to expand the offerings of afterschool and supplemental programs for ELLs. As Title III funds become available next fall, we will be happy to begin an afterschool and Saturday program for ELLs, as we did this year. The afterschool and Saturday programs will be literacy programs designed for newcomers and struggling ELLs with a reading and writing component incorporating the content area of social studies and science. Teachers will also reinforce vocabulary development in this program through direct vocabulary instruction daily. The program will be taught by appropriately certified ENL staff or Bilingual education pedagogues. Afterschool instructional materials might also include leveled readers from 2018-19 CEP 70  Scholastic, supplemental Reading A-Z books, and grammar books called Write! from Curriculum Associates. These grammar books are available in levels A-E for students for the purpose of appropriate differentiation of grammar skills. Students for the programs will be chosen based on need. ENL teachers will review the data collected from NYSESLAT scores to include the students with the lowest total scores. ENL teachers will look at NYSITELL scores for those students who are new to the country and do not have a NYSESLAT score. For the afterschool program, any student with a NYSITELL score of 0 will be encouraged to attend the program. All 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade ELLs with a NYSITELL/NYSESLAT score of Entering and Emerging will be invited and encouraged to attend the Saturday program. All K, 1st and 2nd grade ELLs with a NYSITELL/NYSESLAT score of Entering and Emerging will be encouraged to attend the Afterschool program. After these students are chosen, all students with a NYSESLAT score of Transitioning and Expanding will be invited to attend and so on as the allotted number of 30 student participants is reached for each program. Teachers plan to use native language support with bilingual resources such as translated student books, student to student translation, and teacher to student translation in 25% of bilingual instruction to accommodate a newcomer’s need for native language support. Teachers will regularly encourage parent involvement through an informative parent meeting when the program starts and ongoing conferences with parents as the program progresses through the course of the school year. As parents have expressed the desire for afterschool programs to the ENL teachers already, we anticipate a generous amount of parental involvement and support for this Title III program. In addition, next year PS 157 will continue to partner with FAN (Fitness and Nutrition) 4 Kids, an organization that will support students' physical fitness and nutrition knowledge in grades K-3. We are also hoping to launch an anti-obesity committee with the purpose of supporting students in physical development, health and nutrition. These programs will be open to ELLs according to their grade levels. Finally, next year we will continue our yearly learning garden program for students in the primary grades. Students have the opportunity to work with a gardener in the local park adjacent to the school to learn about the life cycle, planting, gardening, and nutrition. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded the same access to all school enrichment programs as their monolingual peers, depending on the students’ academic grade level. They are invited to participate and given an equal opportunity of participation to whatever programs are available for students in their respective grade levels. These activities include, but are not limited to; orchestra and keyboards. In the past we had been able to offer Mad Hot Ballroom, Chorus, Chess, Basketball, and Running club, Tap class, drama club, art class, and AIS afterschool programs to our ELLs. Unfortunately, due to budgetary constraints we are not able to offer these programs at this time. We hope to be able to reintroduce them in the future to all students, including ELLs. ELLs are invited to supplemental programs funded by Title III such as Saturday Academy and Aftershool. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs have equal access as their monolingual peers to instructional materials. This year Kindergarten, First and Second grade ELLs who were enrolled in the Afterschool program were granted extra access to computer technology through instruction in the computer lab with the technology teacher. ELLs had access to software specifically designed for language and vocabulary development including Rosetta Stone language learning software, Zip Zoom technology, and Visual Language English as a Second Language software from ARC Media, Longman Cornerstone multimedia books on audio CD and language development videos connected to regular ENL content and literacy lessons. We are hoping to offer this again this year in the an Afterschool and/or Saturday program as funds become available. We also have access to ESL Reading Smart, a literacy-based computer program from EdMentum that was implemented to ELLs in grades 3, 4, and 5 throughout the year. We also acquired Reading Eggs, a technology-based literacy supplement to aid in developing literacy skills for emergent readers. Additionally, students in grades 2-5 have the opportunity to access NEWSELA to read high interest leveled news articles, fiction and non-fiction, in both English and Spanish. In order to accommodate ELL use of these programs, we will schedule blocks of time for use of the technology lab, as well as use of the 4 existing computers in the ENL classroom. ELL students also learn how to use word processing programs and the internet in regularly scheduled technology classes. Other instructional materials afforded specifically to ELLs are visual aids, graphic organizers, Longman Cornerstone ELL textbooks, consumable workbooks, and content area vocabulary cards, Language learning games, puzzles and manipulatives. We also use overhead projectors and tranparencies for language support. In ENL, teachers regularly employ the use of class made charts and graphs posted for regular student reference. These instructional materials are used to support ELLs in all subgroups. In general education, 2018-19 CEP 71  special education, and content area classrooms there are intelliboards, laptops, Elmos and projectors for teacher and student use to aid in language development. All classrooms are immersed in print and wherever possible provide picture support and graphic representation of learned concepts. ELLs will have access to these programs with their general education classes.: 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language Support is delivered 25% of the time in our Freestanding ENL program in the way of teacher translation, student to student translation and native language support, and literacy tools such as books, picture dictionaries, and translation dictionaries are available for student use to enrich content and make it comprehensible. As stated earlier, this year we created a Native Language Support Center Library in the ENL classroom. This library includes books in English and Spanish as well as some bilingual books. ELLs and EP students can access this library at any time. These books are used for instructional purposes and students are able to regularly check books out of the library to read at home with parents or anyone at home who can offer literacy support. Other content area teachers, the parent coordinator, and administrative staff are available to translate or deliver instruction where appropriate and as necessary. Also available for primary grade ELLs are emergent storybooks in Spanish that the ENL teacher uses for instruction of Spanish-speaking ELLs in grades K and 1 who are emergent readers. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources correspond to ELLs’ grade levels. Resources and instruction are then differentiated or modified to match the students’ needs and level of background knowledge to meet grade level expectations. Teachers use the Common Core Learning Standards to drive instruction and plan units and lessons accordingly. We use the ELL's current grade level as a starting point for establishing expectations and planning. Wherever possible, an ELL is scheduled for services or support with other members of his or her grade level, using grade level appropriate materials. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When newly enrolled ELLs are identified prior to the beginning of the school year, they are given an opportunity to meet the classroom teacher beforehand. Also, ELLs and their parents have an opportunity to speak with administrative staff, ENL staff, and the parent coordinator about the school, program offerings, curriculum, and grade level expectations. Newly enrolled newcomer ELLs are paired up with one or two “buddy” students with the same native language who can help them through translation and social development and transitions. In most cases, however, newly enrolled ELLs arrive on the first day of school with other newly admitted students or at some point throughout the school year making any summer bridge transition techniques difficult to implement. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time we do not offer a foreign language program in our K-5 elementary school. ELL students are offered English as a Second Language instruction. We would like to consider a Spanish elective program and French elective program in an afterschool or before school program as the budget allows, or as part of our extended day program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 CEP 72  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our school organization and structure is maximized for ample collaboration and planning time among teachers, school leadership, and all stakeholders. Throughout the year, teachers engage in weekly PLCs (professional learning communities) with coaches and administrators. Support staff and out of classroom teachers are welcome to attend PLCs so that teachers can support and learn from each other. We recognize the interdependency of language proficiency and content instruction. In addition, support staff and out of classroom teachers team up with grade level teachers for data analysis on a weekly basis as well. At the beginning of each school year, the ENL teachers meet with the school secretaries and parent coordinator to review paperwork for currently enrolled ELLs and to review intake procedures for potential ELLs. ENL teachers are regularly invited to attend district and region wide training sessions specifically directed toward the effective instruction of ELLs. These trainings may include topics related to compliance issues for the school, ELLs, or ENL instruction, literacy and content area instructional practices for ELLs, assessment analysis for ELLs, and best school wide practices for ELLs based on the ENL standards. ENL teachers are routinely encouraged to attend trainings by the administration and are given an opportunity to turnkey relevant information to classroom teachers and support staff in PLCs, Monday Professional Development, or during regular staff interaction. We also have the opportunity to discuss student progress and best practices during our weekly data analysis meetings. The bilingual Academic Intervention Services staff member regularly attends training sessions targeted for the development of English Language skills for ELLs as well. ELL training for staff including teachers, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, secretaries, and the parent coordinator is provided by the ENL teachers and administration. Although a school based summer institute program was not available at PS 157X this year as a result of budget concerns, this has been a great forum in the past for ENL teachers to turnkey information and best practices for the education of ELLs. This year, ENL teachers directed a PD training for staff members in the areas of ELL Identification, incorporating technology for ELLs, ELL language development, and internet resouces for ELLs. The staff was given a copy of the power point used complete with hyperlinks and great resources for the instruction of ELLs. In attendance at this training was the entire staff including; assistant principals, common branch teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, speech therapists, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, and bilingual service providers. Additionally, ENL teachers arranged for the Borough Field Support Center to present a PD on Integrated ENL and the Seven Models of Coteaching to staff members during a Monday PD. In attendance were all teachers of ELLs including general education and special education teachers from the designated ELL classes from each grade. Also in attendance were the literacy and math coaches as well as an assistant principal. PS 157 Administration and ENL teachers are aware of the changes in the CR Part 154 stating that all teachers must receive the following training: 15% of the total 175 hours must be on ELL-specific topics and 50% of the total 175 hours must be ELL-specific for ENL teachers. ENL teachers work closely with the coaches and administration to develop ELL-specific PDs to present to the staff. Last year on Chancellor Conference Day, ENL teachers presented to the staff a PD called ENL 101. Last December we presented a PD on ELL Sensitivity. For the upcoming year, 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ELL training for staff is provided by the ENL teachers and administration. As stated above, starting again next fall, ENL teachers will be working with the adminstration to ensure that 15% of all teachers' PD hours are dedicated to ELL-specific topics. ENL teachers Ms. Carlson, Ms. Zodiatis, and Ms. Crawford will ask staff members to complete a survey/questionnaire to find out which specific ELL-related topics are of most concern and interest to them. After discovering what areas staff members are most interested in, the ENL teachers will develop PDs in those areas to deliver to the staff. In the past, several hours have been provided to staff during the school’s Summer Institute program (when the budget allows this type of forum). This year ENL teachers and directed a training for all general education staff members in the areas of ELL Identification, incorporating technology for ELLs, and useful resources for ELLs. As stated above, we also held PDs on ENL 101, Integrated ENL and the 2018-19 CEP 73  Seven Models of Coteaching. Opportunities for additional hours of staff training are provided during monthly faculty conference days, Monday after school, professional development calendar days, and weekly PLCs. ENL staff will also conduct a yearly intake PD with designated staff. In the past, ENL staff members established consistent contact with our ELL support Services staff and regularly met with them and other District 7 ENL teachers in meetings and professional development sessions. To ensure ENL teachers receive 50% of total hours of PD on ELL-specific topics, the ENL teachers regularly attend ENL specific trainings, PDs, and institutes through ENL listserves. For example this year, ENL teachers along with teachers of ELLs in the ELL designated First and Fourth grades, attended a two day institute at the UFT on "Integrated Partnerships in the ENL Classroom." ENL teachers also attended PDs on Saturdays such as "Lifting Up All Learners in a Co-Teaching Classroom" and "Opening New Doors for ELLs: Supporting and Challenging New Langauge Learners." Additionally ENL teachers attend monthly ELL Liason meetings for District 7. We will continue to attend these PDs in the upcoming year as to ensure we meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2. To keep track of these PD opportunities, the ENL teachers keep a binder in the ENL classroom with records of all PDs that are given and attended by ENL staff members. Dates of each PD are written down and certificates of completion are kept on hand in this binder and folder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We at PS 157 are aware of the changes in the CR Part 154.2 regarding hosting an additional, annual parent meeting. We will provide parents with an individual meeting with the ENL teachers to discuss the child's language development progress, language proficiency results, and language development needs in all content areas. These meetings will take place during the Tuesday parent-outreach period. The ENL teachers will work closely with the bilingual Spanish speaking parent coordinator to ensure the parents are reached via phone or in person. The meetings will be translated/interpreted into the parent's preferred language when necessary. The bilingual SETSS teacher, Ms. Velez will attend the meetings to translate from English to Spanish. Ms. Carlson will provide French translation and a paraprofessional, will provide translation services in Arabic. Additionally, we have former ELLs who are proficient in English that can serve as translators for parents who speak Soninke, Fulani, Bambara, Twi, and Hausa. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Regular parent involvement at PS 157 includes, but is not limited to participation in monthly PTA meetings. Parents are notified of meetings via a monthly newsletter which is published in both English and Spanish and is distributed monthly. As stated earlier, parents of newly enrolled ELLS are invited to parent orientation meetings in order to establish and maintain communication regarding their child’s progress in school and more specifically in ENL. Additionally, we will be providing parents of ELLs with annual individual meetings to discuss language development. Contact and communication with parents is also established through our bilingual parent coordinator who reaches out and talks extensively with the parents of ELLs. ENL staff members then enter parent choice information into the ELPC function of ATS once parents have had an opportunity to meet with ENL pedagogues and watch the parent orientation video. All parents of students in Pre-kindergarten and kindergarten are invited to school on a weekly basis as part of our “open-classroom” program which seeks to educate parents as to the best practices to help their children learn and work effectively, as well as to establish and maintain positive relationships between students, parents, and teachers as the children progress through the grade levels. In the past, the ENL teacher was able to push-in with Kindergarten during this open-classroom time to facilitate parents’ understanding of best practices for ELL students. Communication is attempted with 100% of ELL parents at our parent/teacher conference days. Parents who are unable to attend this date are asked to set up an additional meeting time with their child’s teacher to specifically discuss the child’s progress. Parents are also encouraged to attend seasonal concerts, showcases, and activities at the school. Parents are consistently thanked for their participation, support and encouragement of school related activities and the academic, social, and emotional development of their child. In addition, all parents, including parents of ELLs are 2018-19 CEP 74  encouraged to participate in individual classroom events such as celebrations and field trips.Additionally, all of the parent workshops, which are held weekly at PS 157, are equipped with translation boxes and headphones. When parents attend workshops and speak a language other than Spanish and English, staff members provide translation services. If a staff member who speaks the parent's home language is unavailable, we call the TIU for translation services to ensure the parent fully understands the content of the particular workshop. Parent workshops provide parents with a wealth of knowledge on every topic from understanding the implications of the CCLS to finding safe learning websites at home for their children to use. Workshops last fall included: The Middle School Application process, Building Capacity/Framework for Excellence, Promotion in Doubt, Absences/Latenesses, Student Progress and Standardized Testing, CBOs (Community Based Organizations), and Kindergarten Reading and Writing Workshop. On Saturday May 20th, PS 157 hosted a Parent Summit in which several parents of ELLs attended. This summit featured an array of activities and workshops on different topics such as RtI and IEPs to Fostering Diversity and musical performances by the PS 157 Chorus. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ramona Duran, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 157 School DBN: 07157 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ramona A. Duran Title Principal Katrina Fennell Assistant Principal Ana Miranda Jane Carlson Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Irma Rodriguez Parent Agnes Zodiatis Teacher/Subject Area Brenda Velez Virginia Niles Emmeline Roopchand Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jamal Horsley School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 2018-19 CEP 77  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X157 School Name: PS 157X Superintendent: Rafael Alvarez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ana(*Primary) Miranda Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the Grove Hill P.S. 157X we gather the primary data at the time of registration through the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). Information entered in the ATS system is used to identify parent's preferences and who are their children to provide a more individualize service. Data is also obtain through the Emergency Blue Card and through teachers/classroom surveys in which the teacher conduct with the parents at the beginning of the school year or when a new student entered the class. Also, when a parent meeting/conference is scheduled and the parent's primary language is not English we contact the parent to verify their preferred language and determine the need for written and oral translation/interpreters. 2018-19 CEP 78  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bambara French Haitian Creole English Spanish Soninke TWI WOLOF N/A 1 2 1 2 2 525 102 0 1 1 N/A 0.16 0.31 0.16 0.31 0.31 82.42 16.01 0 0.16 0.16 N/A 1 2 1 2 2 517 109 1 1 1 N/A 0.16 0.31 0.16 0.31 0.31 81.16 17.11 0.16 0.16 0.16 N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Monthly / Parent Newsletter, Ongoing throughout the year. Educational programs and services Monthly and ongoing through the school year. Translations are done by in house personnel in a timely fashion to ensure a timely delivery to parents. In addition, DOE/Outside agency translating services. Translated by in house personnel, office staff and/or parent coordinator and teachers. Monthly Calendars Monthly Parent Coordinator After-school programs information as needed it ongoing throughout the school year Office personnel, parent coordinator, related staff 2018-19 CEP 79  Letters from administration Quarterly As needed it Letters from teachers As needed it School Personnel Parent Coordinator School Personnel Parent Coordinator Parent Association Monthly Parent Coordinator/school personnel School Leadership Team Notices Monthly and/or as needed it School personnel All events and fliers announcing activities Once or twice a month and when necessary Parent coordinator, teachers and translation/interpretation unit, as well as other resources. DOE translated documents/materials Parent-Teacher Conferences Four times a year Outside agency New York State testing dates, general overview Once for ELA testing, "Once for Math testing, Once for Science testing Translated by staff and/or parent coordinator on a monthly basis. Information regarding students curriculum Once a year and when necessary All materials and fliers translated by parent coordinator and/or teachers. In house translation 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum night September Monthly parents meetings starting in September, and ongoing throughout the year. Parent-Teacher Conference Four times a year After-school program information As need it, throughout the school year. interpretation service(s)? In house personnel. In addition, DOE/outside translation/interpretation agencies. Translation will be done with the use of the translation equipment has been purchased by the school. Translated by office staff and/or [parent coordinator or teachers if available. Translated by office staff and/or parent coordinator or teachers. In person interpreter through the DOE translation/interpretation unit Office staff and/or parent coordinator on a monthly basis. 2018-19 CEP 80  Workshops Monthly during the school year Bilingual school staff and/or parent coordinator as well as DOE interpreters. Parent coordinator Individual parent conferences Throughout the school year as need it Teachers IEP Meetings Ongoing throughout the year (as need it) Parent coordinator, teachers Over the phone interpretation unit School personnel Language Line Interpretation provided by school personnel Terrific Parent Tuesday Two weeks prior to the event, and ongoing throughout the year. Teachers Parent Coordinator 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The language phone line training is being provided to all staff members to contact families identify as other language as English preferred. The fliers with the telephone number and steps to follow have being distributed to all staff members. Teachers and other personnel are familiar with the family preferred language script and services. We inform the parents of the translation service availability in case they need to contact the school. Parents have been informed that they can also ask for the parent coordinator for assistance. In case of an emergency we use Global Connect which place phone calls in English and Spanish and use the translation unit for other languages. Global Connect Blackboard phone blast system also provides translation in Spanish, Arabic, and French. The system also sends the messages via text or email. Fliers and letters are translated in different languages either by a staff member or using DOE translated documents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the school year, all staff members are made aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-633 and the actual Regulation is distributed to all staff. We provide PD during grade and staff meetings informing them about the over the phone interpretation services. Such as three- way calling interpreters, request and on-site interpreter and who to contact in case there is the need to request documents translation. 2018-19 CEP 81  As a support to our staff translation/interpretation materials such as contact number, school code, scripts and surveys have been distribute to all teachers,. office personnel and other staff members. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parents will be notified of their rights to receive translation and/or interpretation services if their primary language is one of the covered languages. This notification will be sent home to parents at the beginning of year school year. In addition, parents will be provided with the Web Site address so that they can also access needed services themselves. We will be careful to ensure that parents are not prevented from being able to contact the school and/or any of the staff members solely because they are unable to speak the language. Office staff will be available who can speak both languages and will assist parents whenever necessary. The school’s Safety Plan will cover the translation and interpretation needs and rights of parents as part of their overall parental involvement initiative. Whenever we are unable to supply these services due to no staff member being able to speak the language needed, we will contact the Department’s Translation and Interpretation Unit so that they can, in a timely fashion, provide these services as needed. All copies of any and all notifications i.e. notification of parents rights regarding translation and interpretation in the main office and will in addition be posted in Spanish, English as well as other languages (if necessary) on the wall in the Main Lobby/Entrance to the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback on the quality of the translation services offered to our parents will be gathered through a parent survey to be sent out twice a year once at the beginning of the year and again in the middle of the year in order to ensure that we are meeting the language and translation needs of our parents. As per the survey issues/concerns will be addressed and "fixed" to ensure quality control. 2018-19 CEP 82 
