2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X159 School Name: P.S. 159 LUIS MUNOZ MARIN BILING Principal: LUIS LIZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: LUIS MUNOZ MARIN BILINGUAL SCHOOL 321000010159 ELEMENTARY (K-5) 2315 WASHINGTON AVENUE 7185846140 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 10X159 7185847794 Fax: LUIS LIZ LLIZ@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: LUIS LIZ EVELYN ORTIZ EleuteriaMargarito EVELYN ORTIZ NA NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: TEN Superintendent’s Office Address: MARIBEL HULLA Superintendent: 1 FORDHAM PLAZA BRONX NY 10458 Room 836 MHULLA@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 7187415852 Phone Number: 718.741.7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  BRONX District 10 JOSE RUIZ FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 1 FORDHAM PLAZA BRONX NY 10458 JRUIZ2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: 7188287776 Phone Number: 718.741.7098 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Luis Liz Evelyn Ortiz EleuteriaMargarito NA NA NA NA NA Maria Diaz Rosa Ojeda Evira Matos *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ana Felipe Sandra Lucero Guadalupe Lucero Wendy Pacheco Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission at Public School 159 is for all of our students to develop a life long love of learning. We believe all students will reach high standards in a equitable child-centered, risk free environment that utilizes the children's strengths and interests to move them forward. Our ultimate goal is for the entire school community, staff, students, and parents to work collaboratively, support, and enhance life-long learners who can become active productive members of a multicultural and complex society. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 159 aligns its resources to support instructional goals that meet students’ needs. We use curricula-aligned assessment practices that inform instruction to better enhance and support student learning. We strive to actively incorporate a culture of learning that communicates high expectations with supports to provide students opportunities for academic success. The incorporation of the arts and physical education are part of the culture of Public School 159. We have long establish collaborations with Arts organizations. We also utilize partnerships with the New York Road Runners to engage our students in physical fitness activities. We have a cohesive school community where 99% of parents are satisfied with the education that their child has received and 100% of teachers feel that order and discipline are maintained at this school and agree that leaders of this school place a high priority on the quality of teaching. Teachers are supported and evaluated through timely, actionable feedback using the Danielson Framework and the practice of analyzing student learning outcomes. Public School 159 has traditionally had high parent collaboration and participation. We will continue to utilize the entire community and encourage a unified and shared vision that promotes trust and a shared goal to ultimately improve student outcomes at school and at home and ultimately prepare them for college and careers. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Public School 159, the Luis Muñoz Marín Bilingual School is an elementary school in Community School District Ten in the New York City Department of Education. Our school serves students in grades kindergarten through fifth grade. Our students are about 93 percent Hispanic and 7 percent African American. We historically have between 30 to 50 percent of our students being English Language Learners and 20 to 30 percent being Students With Learning Disabilities. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has maintained a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that are exemplified in many initiatives and has supported students voice and enhanced family outreach. We plan on focusing on Advance Literacy to deepen teachers’ skill and the use of formative assessment practices as well as student self- assessment so that teachers make effective adjustments to meet students’ learning needs during classroom lessons and teacher team meetings. To make progress in building strong family and community ties. Public School 159 continues to create welcoming environments for families and take advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. We will also continue to focus on providing our students with a Rigorous curriculum aligned to the Common Core that challenges students, scaffolds their experience, and is enlivened by teachers who are engaged with their craft. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X159 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 193 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 11 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 86.0% % Reduced Lunch 26.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 83.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.75 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 55.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 21 21 91.5% 0.0% 12.4% 13.0% 0.0% 1.0% 2 0% 10.6 29.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Based on the data analysis of informal and formal assessments Fountas & Pinnell, ReadyGen and GoMath Unit assesments as well as the 2017 state assessment performance, we will continue to tailor curricula so units of study across all grades and subjects embed rigorous instructional tasks throughout daily lessons, focused on advanced reading skills that provide students with specific and actionable feedback that support and extend student higher level thinking and comprehension and challenge our students to produce quality work at standard levels and beyond. ● We will strengthen our practice with cycles of professional learning and schedule regular teacher meeting times that targets support for staff to implement curricula aligned to CCLS, focused on advanced literacy skills. We are also part of the District Ten Reciprocal Teaching series with Generation Ready cohorts 2 Initiate to cognitively engage all students including students with diverse learning needs that promotes college and career readiness. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all teachers will participate in, and at times lead, on-going weekly professional learning to Improve teacher pedagogy and strategies in the teaching of reading, assessing student learning and increasing reading comprehension which will result in a 3% increase in students attaining proficiency in ELA and a 3% increase of students attaining proficiency in math, as measured by the NYS Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue to conduct professional learning so that it is conducted in cycles of 4 to 6 weeks. Participation of teacher teams, both horizontal and vertical, administration, school coach, consultants, and BFSC instructional specialist to improve on our common understanding of what effective reading instruction looks like, assessment and planning for cognitive engagement and increased student reading comprehension . Through frequent observations based on the Danielson Framework and feedback with administration, pedagogical practices across classrooms based on Advance data will be reviewed to monitor and support relationship of instructional practices aligned to the school’s core beliefs, curricula and professional development. Pedagogical and Administrative staff Pedagogical staff Through analysis of student work we will promote and expand on our understanding of multiple access points, scaffolding, and routines across classrooms that address the diverse needs of all students and further inform customized professional development and lesson delivery. Pedagogical and Administrative staff Through ongoing communication (progress reports and workshops) with school community, families and staff, a shared understanding of rigorous expectations based on CCLS will be established with a shared goal to ultimately improve student outcomes at school and at home. School community Administrators , coaches, teachers, BFSC contentment specialist and consultants Administrators Administrators, Coaches and teachers Administrators , parent coordinator and teachers 3 to 4 times a month , from September 2018 to June 2019 Each teacher a minimum of 3 observations starting in October 2018 to May 2019 Twice a month starting September 2018 to June 2019 Varied workshops based on parental interest and needs from October 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 13  We will continue to provide an "open access" policy where parents are welcomed and encouraged to come to our school and participate and support us in the education of our students and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core . We will provide monthly workshops with varied topics including curriculum and social emotional needs for the goal of creating parent partners in the education of all students. Our Parent Coordinator will be responsible for arranging the workshops, starting September 2018 and concluding in May 0f 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Through a consolidation of Tax Levy and Non-Tax Levy funding (as indicated below) we will utilize; Funding for consultant to provide Professional Learning and in class support in the area of reading instruction Funding for resources for units of study (Go Math and Ready Gen) Purchase Additional non fiction and fiction leveled texts Funding for technology resources Per session funding for additional team planning Funding for parent outreach and curricula workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● January, 2019 3% increase in teacher effectiveness in Domain 3:instruction with documented observations of teachers using strategies to increase reading comprehension. ● January , 2019, 80 % of students moving up a minimum of one reading level as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell midyear assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Through writing samples, teacher made test, reading inventories and unit assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on feedback, surveys and student behaviors, PS 159 continues to provide a warm nurturing environment that is welcoming to all members of the school community and supports student learning . To sustain and build this strong positive culture, we will enhance our plan and provide professional development to systematically work with stakeholders to create a collaborative vision and understanding of clearly articulated skills and behaviors that demonstrate social and emotional development health so that the students can learn and implement behaviors that will lead to college and career readiness. (5.3/QR-state recommendation) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% reduction in student behavioral occurrence's as measured by the NYC Online Occurrence Reporting System . 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  professional learning will be provided to systematically work with stakeholders to create a collaborative vision and understanding of clearly articulated skills and behaviors that demonstrate social and emotional development, so that the students can learn and implement behaviors that will lead to college and career readiness. Through ongoing communication using ClassDojo a web based interactive program that allows communication with parents reports, parent meetings and workshops) with school community, families, staff, student council and student body, a supportive environment and shared understanding of student behavioral expectations will be established with a shared goal to ultimately improve student outcomes at school and at home such that students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. School community 2 to 3 times a month starting in September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators , parent coordinator, outside organizations and teachers Administrators , parent coordinator and teachers School community on going monthly correspondence with guardians starting in September 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to welcome and encourage parents and guardians to come to our school and participate and support us in the education of our students. We will provide monthly workshops with varied topics like; school curriculum, social emotional needs, healthy living, community support resources, your library and others. Our Parent Coordinator will be responsible for arranging the workshops, starting September 2017 and concluding in May 0f 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Provide funding for family workshops to support and enhance student progress Provide funding for supplemental curriculum supplies: high interest books, assorted genre text, technology 2018-19 CEP 16  resources. Provide Per Session funding for teachers and Administration for additional professional learning, curriculum planning, and analyzing student data Provide Per Diem funding to allow teachers to attend professional learning workshops. Provide funding for additional professional learning dependent on the identified needs as they emerge Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be no increase in behavioral incidents and Suspensions as reported to OORS the New York City Online Occurrence Reporting System (0%)in student disciplinary incidences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Office of Safety and Youth Development Portal, Suspension Reports and Student Occurrence reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on school self reflection, NYSED School report card and the NYC School Survey we will continue to implement protocols that focus professional learning on deepening teachers’ ability to teach reading and the analysis of sumative and formative assessment data to make timely adjustments to instruction that effectively meet students’ diverse learning needs and inform instructional decision-making and to provide targeted and actionable feedback so that students take ownership of their learning and develop self-reflection protocols for students to reflect upon and assess their own progress.(4.5 /QR-state recommendation) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, teachers and administration will focus on implementing effective protocols and provide professional learning to deepen teachers’ ability to analyze formative and summative assessment data to make timely adjustments to instruction that effectively meet students’ diverse learning needs and inform instructional decision-making resulting in a 7% decrease in student performance at a level 1 in the NYS ELA assessment. A 3% increase in students performance at level 3 and above on the NYS ELA assessment. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers and Administrators will participate in ongoing teacher team meeting to analyze student work that inform instruction and curricular modification to meet the needs of all students. Teachers and Administrators will use a variety of data sources including screening, interim measures and progress monitoring to inform lesson planning, develop explicit teacher plans and foster student participation in their own learning process. Through ongoing communication (progress reports and workshops) with school community, families and staff, a shared understanding of rigorous expectations based on CCLS will be established with a shared goal to ultimately improve student outcomes at school and at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Pedagogical staff Pedagogical staff September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, BFSC Content Specialist, In-house Coaches September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, BFSC Coaches, In-house Coaches Pedagogical staff September 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, Network Coaches, In-house Coaches How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to provide an "open access" policy where parents are welcomed and encouraged to come to our school and participate and support us in the education of our students. We will provide monthly workshops with varied topics including curriculum and social emotional needs. Our Parent Coordinator will be responsible for arranging the workshops, starting September 2018 and concluding in May 0f 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Schedule professional learning (4 to 5 week cycles), observations, inter visitations and family communication meetings, ● Provide funding for supplemental curriculum supplies, ● Provide Per Session funding for teachers and Administration for additional pd, curriculum planning, and analyzing student data 2018-19 CEP 19  ● Provide funding for professional learning- dependent on the identified needs as they emerge (per session, per diem, consultants and materials)-where possible we will conduct PD in-house. Purchase professional books for teacher book study Funding will be provided through Title i and Tax Levy Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 65% of students performing below grade level will demonstrate progress as measured by the iReady and/or F&P midyear ELA assessment and 90% of students at or above grade level will maintain or demonstrate positive growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady and or F&P midyear ELA assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on analysis of student work and performance on the 2017 state assessments, we will continue to implement a prioritized schedule of targeted and frequent observations that provides constructive feedback to staff guided by our instructional focus on improving student reading comprehension and mathematics instruction that includes a system of accountability for continuous improvement, along with targeted on-going support so teachers take ownership for their own professional learning in identified areas. Conduct targeted professional learning sessions in 4 to 5 week cycles to deepen understanding and insure teacher effective implementation.(2.4 /QR-state recommendation) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 4% decrease of students achieving level 1 on the State ELA and Mathematics assessments. By June of 2019, 3% increase of students achieving level 3 and above on the State ELA and Mathematics assessments. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Through parental outreach we will provide ongoing workshops for parents on providing additional support, resources and strategies to achievement a shared goal to ultimately improve student outcomes at school and at home.. Through frequent observations and feedback with administration pedagogical practices across classrooms will be reviewed to monitor and support relationship of instructional practices aligned to the school’s core beliefs and curricula. Through ongoing communication (progress reports and workshops) with school community, families and staff, a shared understanding of rigorous expectations based on CCLS will be established with a shared goal to ultimately improve student outcomes at school and at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents/Guardians September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Pedagogical Staff September 2018 to June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Parents/Guardians September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to build trust by providing an "open access" policy where parents are welcomed and encouraged to come to our school and participate and support us in the education of our students. We will provide monthly workshops with varied topics including curriculum and social emotional needs. Our Parent Coordinator will be responsible for arranging the workshops, starting September 2018 and concluding in May 0f 2019. Administration will be present at Parent Association meetings to clarify and inform parents of any concerns and or issues. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Additional Online instructional resources (MyOn, iReady, Raz Kids,) Scheduling for co-teaching during ELA and Math instruction. ULIT (Universal Literacy Coach), School Literacy Coach. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 22  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2018, 50% of all teachers will have been observed at least 2 times. 70% of the observed teachers will have been rated effective as measured with the Danielson Rubric . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance, administrator formal and informal observations and classroom visits. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Sustain and build upon relationships with families and community-based organizations and monitor feedback from staff, family and community to increase services that aid families in supporting student achievement. 1.3 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will continue to provide opportunities for parent engagement with in the school during the 2018-19 school year, so that parents and families feel welcomed and encouraged to engage with the school which will result in a 5% increase in students meeting proficiency on state exams and or reading inventories. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will continue to provide parental outreach and provide ongoing workshops for parents to promote stronger family and community ties and to increase parent involvement in support of improved student outcomes, on topics and concerns they request to ultimately improve student outcomes at school and at home. We will utilize the provided Tuesday afternoon time, to increase communication with parents and guardians in supporting the needs of all students including those with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).achievement. Parents/Guardians September 2018 to June 2019 Parents/Guardians September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Community Organizations, Health Professionals Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Community Organizations, Health Professionals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Office of School Health, SMHC, Cornell University Cooperative, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our Parent Coordinator, local agencies, DOE resources, Our Teachers (Per Session), Administration and Guidance Councilor. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 25  February 2019, 3% Increase in parent participation in meetings to discuss student progress and workshop participation for parents by staff and organizations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance participation monitoring at parent workshops Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Flexible Small Group Instruction Technology (Laptops, ipads), Rubrics When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, before and or afterschool. Programs consist of guided reading or strategy groups based on specific skills and strategies. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students that have yet to demonstrate grade level ability in ELA. Mathematics Students that have yet to demonstrate grade level ability in Mathematics . Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Flexible Strategy Groups in Reading, Math, Science and Social Studies. Repeated close reading strategies Daily Flexible Small Group Instruction, Reading A to Z, RAZ Kids, Brain Pop, IXL, iReady, NY Ready and Additional Guided Reading, On going assessment utilizing Fountasand Pinnellto monitor progress. Daily Flexible Small Group Instruction, Hands On Math Activities, RAZ Kids, Mind Math, iReady, NY Ready and Strategy Groups (Reading, Math, Science, Social Studies Flexible Small Group Instruction Technology (Laptops, ipads),Rubrics Students also at-risk in grades K through 5 participate in the AIStargeted assistanceProgram 4 times a week in cycles of 6 weeks. Programs consist of guided reading or strategy groups based on specific skills and strategies. Classroom teachers also provide supplement activities, homework, and center work/activities on student needs, Science Students that have yet to demonstrate grade level ability in Science. Students receive small group instruction focusing on specific science content, process, and inquiry skills. Science is also Flexible Small Group Instruction Technology (Laptops, ipads) Science instruction supports intervention in the sciences due to 2018-19 CEP 27  Social Studies Students that have yet to demonstrate grade level ability in Social Studies content area work.Rubrics particularly those at-risk. Differentiated planning also supports student learning. Instructional technology tools like Brain Pop are also incorporated to enhance student understanding. Flexible Small Group Instruction Instructional technology tools like iPads and BrainPop are also incorporated to engage and enhance student understanding.Rubrics Differentiated planning and instruction also supports student learning. Instructional technology tools like iPads and BrainPop are also incorporated to engage and enhance student understanding. incorporated into the Literacy block. Both formative and summative assessment data is used to determine students at-risk. Science instruction supports intervention in the sciences due to content area work. Classroom teachers also provide supplement activities, homework, and center work/activities on student needs, particularly those at-risk. Differentiated planning also supports student learning. Instructional technology tools like Brain Pop are also incorporated to enhance student understanding. Students receive small group instruction focusing on specific content, process, and inquiry skills. Both formative and summative assessment data is used to determine students at risk. Classroom teachers also provide supplement activities, homework, and center work/activities around student needs, particularly those at-risk. 2018-19 CEP 28  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Counseling Crisis Intervention Individual as needed During School Individual or small group Counseling Crisis Intervention Individual as needed During School Individual or small group Counseling Crisis Intervention Individual as needed During School Individual or small group Counseling Crisis Intervention Individual as needed During School Individual or small group 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 18 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide student learning supplies and emergency materials as needed. We will offer their families greater access to our Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor to support and provide assistance. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). TITLE I SCHOOL 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 30  TITLE I SCHOOL 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. TITLE I SCHOOL 2018-19 CEP 31  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We will to continue to develop relationships with Colleges to provide student teachers with their practicum. This brings a good source of certified teacher and support that includes high quality professional development to ensure that the staff is highly qualified.  Provide teachers with ongoing high quality professional learning opportunities.  Continue to attend hiring fairs to find available teachers in shortage areas when needed.  Work closely with Human Resource Director to fill vacancies with qualified candidates when needed.  Continue our relationship with colleges to conduct practicum’s for future teachers.  Continue to set aside funding to assist teachers in obtaining credits to achieve Highly Qualify status. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All pedagogical staff are encouraged and supported in seeking high quality professional development. Our teachers will engage in cycles of learning for periods of 4 to 6 weeks focused on the needs of our students and the improvement ot teacher instruction. Administration provides class coverage for teachers to attend professional development. Administration seeks out consultants with specific expertise to meet the needs of staff and administration. We will also utilize our BFC personnel and instructional specialist to support and increase teacher effectiveness including social/emotional supports and strategies to engage/educate parents so that they can help prepare their child for moving up to elementary school. . Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 32  NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We baseline assess all early childhood students within the first two weeks of their arrival at our school. We analyze any previous education records the student may or may not have. We attempt to create a clearer picture of their educational background so as to address all of their needs. We provide an additional pedagogue during literacy instruction and mathematics instruction to reduce the ratio of instructor to student to increase student learning. We plan and provide workshops held by our teachers with the parent/guardians on ways to best support and guide their child for academic success 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers and Administrators meet on an ongoing basis as grade level teams where they engage in the analysis of student work products. The teachers as a team decide on next steps that would improve student-learning base on their findings. The work is supported by the administration and the expertise of the instructional coaches. We regularly use student writing samples, running records, teacher made assessment and curriculum based end of units assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Funding Amount Indicate the amount Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and 2018-19 CEP 33  Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 13, 16, 19 16, 19 13, 16, 19 13,16, 19 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 183,299 89.056 12,366 0 1,265.924 X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 34   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Public School 159 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Public School 159 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 37  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Public School 159 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 39  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 6 6 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III funds at our school will be used for after school student instruction per session activities. The instructional program will provide support in literacy and English language acquisition, second language skills, and mathematics. The workshop model will support the program by providing instruction in English. The program will focus on grades K – 5 as an extended afternoon program. Each teacher/class will have approximately 10-15 students each. The students will be flexibly grouped based on NYSESLAT results and teacher assessments and recommendations. The total number of students to be serviced is anticipated to be 58 students. Sub Groups K EN-6, EM-2, TR-3, EX-4 1 EN-6, EM-4, TR-4, EX-4 2 TR-7 3 EM-1, EX-4, TR-5 4 EX-2, TR-3 5 EX-7, TR-1 Teachers will meet to group students by strengths and needs. Materials will be selected collectively with the Assistant Principal and literacy coach as the lead teacher. Planning and designing activities will be created collaboratively and implemented by all teachers with a focus on differentiated instruction, language acquisition and comprehension. Materials will be made available to all classes. The teachers will be using Empire State NYSESLAT ESL/ELL and trade books, Reading A-Z collection K- Carlos goes to school, 1- My Nieghboorhood, 2- Community Workers, 3- Pizza 4- A seed grows 5- Whales . We will also incorporate the use of iPads and the newly purchased MyOn digital library where student will have access to thousands of book titles in English and Spanish to further engage and enhance student learning. All grade levels kindergarten through fifth grade will have workbooks 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information for all students. The classes will be held on Wednesdays from 2:20pm to 3:30pm starting in early October 2018 and ending in March of 2019 . All instruction will be focused on building phonemic awareness, decoding skills, fluency and developing comprehension through increase vocabulary acquisition. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: opportunities opportunities We as a school place a great emphasis on on-going staff development so as to provide a strong academic foundation. Classroom teachers and the Title III direct instruction providers, as well as other teachers of ELLs, are offered common preparation periods to facilitate teacher articulation and professional development. Our school is supported by on site Bilingual literacy and Bilingual mathematics staff developers who will deliver the professional development along with the utilization of lab sites and private consultants. The new structure in place that provides dedicated professional development every Monday will facilitate teacher development in the ELL instruction. With this year’s focus on The Five Pillars of Reading Instruction we will continue with an emphasis of examining student work and how to effectively reach and enhance learning for our ELL students. The objectives to be accomplished will be to modify the units of study for reading and writing, improving the skill of conferring with students, developing differentiated lessons to address the ELL students , increasing the academic rigor to meet state standards as well as providing teachers of grade K-5 with ongoing staff development and support in implementing a more rigorous instructional program the challenges our students to reach state standards. Teachers will be offered additional opportunities to attend workshops offered by the NYCDOE and our Network ELL department whenever available. Less experienced teachers have been assigned a senior teacher as a mentor to assist and model effective instruction focused on the needs of ELL's. Professional Development Sessions : F&P Assessment in Espanol ELL Instructional Strategies Word study for ELL students Questioning and Discusions for ELLs Analyzing ELL student work Rigor and the ELL student Analyzing ELL student work part 2 Differentiation for the Ell Student Designing Rubrics for ELLs 2018-19 CEP 44  Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We have historically had excellent participation in workshops, meetings and activities. ELL Parents are attending workshops on, adult education classes and curriculum training classes. We conduct on-going parent workshops on varying topics such as: "Selecting the right book for your child" "Helping your child with his homework", "Story Telling", "State ELA, Math and NYSESLAT support" Parent Coordinator is very active and parents seek her out for assistance. We survey our parents as to what areas they would like workshop on. Workshops are conducted by our teachers, purchased vendors and guest from organizations and DOE central staff. Workshops are held in the morning or afternoon and on Saturdays. Parents are notified at parent meetings and through written correspondence. All notifications and correspondence with parents are translated to Spanish. Possible ELL Parent Workshop topics: October 2018 2:45PM- Learning expectations, November 2018 8:10AM- Choosing your childs Middle School Saturday November 2018 9:00AM- Picking the right book for your child December 2018 2:45PM- CC Mathematics January 2019 2:45PM- Writing strategies March 2019 9:00AM- State assessments May 2019 2:45PM- Getting ready for the next grade Our office staff is bilingual and there is always a bilingual member available to assist our parents. 2018-19 CEP 45 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Teacher afterschool per session Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12366  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 12366 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name LUIS MUNOZ MARIN BILINGUAL SCHOOL Borough Bronx School Number 159 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Luis Liz Coach Annette Berrios ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maria Diaz Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Michelle Mendez Coach School Counselor Moses Torres Parent type here Parent Coordinator Nereida Ramirez Field Support Center Staff Member Socorro Diaz Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 5 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 10 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 192 2018-19 CEP 47 Total number of ELLs 64 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 33.33%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): 0 Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 2 2 4 1 3 2 K 1 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 1 2 2 1 5 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 9 0 0 0 0 0 9 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For all grades we use the Fountas and Pinnell Literacy assessment to determine literacy skills for all students, including ELLs. Many of our students are lacking many of the comprehension strategies necessary to be successful in State exams. Hence, the emphasis school-wide for new ELLs is not only on decoding skills, but comprehension skills and strategies. We use the data from Fountas & Pinnell. NYSESLAT, end of unit literacy assessments and writing samples to help inform our guided reading programs and instruction. These assessments allow us to properly group the students for literacy and identify specific skills and strategies that the students need. They also inform us of which students may be in need of AIS in all grades. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We provide a co-teaching model to support student assessment and instruction. 2018-19 CEP 48  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ENL program is determined by the number of students who make progress on the NYSESLAT, 28% of the students advanced at least one proficiency level. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We provide a co-teaching model to support student assessment and instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All ELL students who score level 1 in the ELA and Math state exams are initially placed in an RTI at-risk group where extra support is given (AIS, Small Group Instructionin ELA and Math) to help them improve their skills. ELLs are periodically assessed according to their grade level. Fontas and Pinnel and Writing Diagnostic (baseline, Midline and Endline). The aim of RTI is to provide at-risk academic support services before an initial referral is made to the Committee in Special Education Services (CSE) within the school building. Based on their assessment level, students are then placed in the appropriate Tier Level. The data from the assessments is used to guide RTI instruction. From the data, specific skills and strategies needed are identified for each student. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Many of the students who are new arrivals, regardless of grade, scored at the Entering level of the NYSESLAT because they are not proficient in communicative and literacy skills in English as well as their native language.. The 2017 NYSESLAT data shows that our students scored lowest in writing. Interventions and supports will be more specific and focused on student writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have regularly scheduled grade team meetings where the data is analyzed and disseminated to support next steps. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We provide a heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels] with a push in co-teacher, where one teacher is Bilingual certified. All students are provided with their mandated periods of ENL instruction b. TBE program. If applicable. We group our students in several ways. One way students are grouped is by grade level. Another way we group our students is by reading proficiency level.Students in the Transitional Bilingual program including SWD's receive instruction from New York State Certified Bilingual Education Teachers in both the native and target language. The goal of the bilingual program is to gradually transition students into English-only instruction. The primary language (Spanish) is used to support the transition. In 2018-19 CEP 49  the bilingual program, students are taught in their native language with intensive support in English language instruction. Content area (Math, Science and Social Studies) instruction is mainly in the students’ native language (Spanish) with some instruction in English (with ESL support) depending on students’ English proficiency level. Students receive grade level appropriate work which helps them meet New York State Standards. This helps them make academic progress in the content areas while they develop English proficiency. In the push-in ESL program, students content area instruction is in English-only with ESL support provided by the push-in ESL teacher. c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Transitional bilingual education is the theory that "reading in one's native language facilitates reading in a second languages. [And] that children's achievement in a second language depends on their mastery of their native language" (Porter 3). In other words, a solid foundation in the students' native language best prepares them for learning in English. Students at Public School 159 are provided instruction in their native language through a certified Bilingual Teacher. The Bilingual teacher ensures that the students are provided their allotted times as per CR-Part 154.2. ELA instruction is delivered by the classroom teacher and co-teacher one of which is bilingual certified. Students’ varying needs are met not only by the Bilingual teacher, but also by the classroom teachers. All of our classroom teachers have received training in differentiation of instruction as well as in RTI to address students who are functioning below level. To assist newcomers in Mathematics, we also use our co-teaching model where one teacher is a bilingual teacher, all efforts are made to supply materials in the students’ native language (Spanish). Newcomers are also placed in the Title III ESL after school program. Many of our long-term ELLs also receive either Resource Room or other AIS services in addition to ESL to assist them in their language development. All intervention services are provided in English. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content is delivered in the home language in either science or social studies. We use non-fiction materials which are aligned with the CCLS. Teachers use authentic literature and other titles available in the native language as the basis of common core aligned units of study in native language arts classes. Go Math (Grades K-5) include teachers guides and student editions with built in vocabulary support in every unit. Additionally, each lesson includes suggestions for instructional strategies for various levels of student understanding. ELL students are also paired up with peer tutor who speaks their native language to assist them during area instruction whenever possible. The general education teachers are provided with supplemental materials from the Bilingual teacher to assist in teaching and supporting the ELLs in their classroom. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students who are first time admits are evaluated in their native language with the NYSITEL in Spanish. The ELE results are used to evaluate student progress. We also utilize Fontas and Pinnell en Español. Instruction is provided in English and Spanish whenever possible to our newcomers. The students are trained in using a translated version side by side and are given the option to either complete the test in Spanish or in English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? a. SIFE 2018-19 CEP 50  b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for SIFE students and newcomers by providing visuals, diagrams, graphic organizers, and allowing extra time to complete activities. c. Instruction is differentiated for Developing level students by providing them with graphic organizers, instructions that are step-by-step to follow. d/e. Instruction is differentiated for Long Term and Former ELLs by providing more complex and higher order thinking questions and activities. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies that teachers of ELLs use in their classrooms include making lessons visual, making connections to prior knowledge, modifying vocabulary instruction, and providing them with personal word walls. The grade-level materials we use is Reading A-Z and RAZ KIDS, which provides access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All special education students model are serviced as mandated by their IEP recommendations and ELL eligibility. All instruction and scheduling is done within the student required setting to accommodate all of their educational support services as they are mandated to receive Speech, Counseling, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, and Adaptive Physical Education support services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our Academic Intervention Providers are using a variety of intervention programs to address the specific needs of our ELL groups which are offered in English. The ELLs in grades K-2 receive targeted intervention from the Reading Specialist which uses Ready Gen and Fundations Program that focuses on phonemic awareness, blending, letter sounds, etc. with a variety of non-fiction books related within the content areas (i.e., Social Studies, Science, and Math). All students are provided support the additional pedagogue always ensuring that one is bilingual, resource teachers, and math providers (enrichment). Guided Reading is provided using fiction and non-fiction texts (Social Studies, Science, and Math). These programs are provided in English. The AIS teachers in grades K-5 AIS teachers are also bilingual. They use ReadyGen and Go Math programs to provide continuity and support the work of the classroom teacher. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to use the IReady online assessment program to provide more support for our Ell students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have no plans to discontinue any ELL program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are invited to participate in all academic programs offered at PS 159. ELLs are invited to ELA and Math test prep academy. They are also invited to all of our extracurricular programs which affords the students with classes in athletics, technology and the arts. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 51  To support and supplement instruction provided to ESL students, all teachers are provided with a Bilingual Library/Leveled Library/Media Center in their classroom for use during independent study and/or independent reading. These areas include audio cassettes and CDs, phonics games, puzzles and flash cards, bilingual and picture dictionaries, trade books, periodical and newspaper activities, computers and tablets with internet capabilities and Smart Boards. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our Bilingual program we provide native language support by the Bilingual teacher in all the content areas to newcomers or beginning level students whenever it is needed. The support is given through the use of native language dictionaries, translated materials for content instruction, native language library and other resource materials. In addition, we provide Bilingual-Spanish teacher during reading and mathematics instruction to support ELL students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required service support and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our Bilingual and classroom instruction is currently aligned with the Common Core Curriculum that is delivered on a daily basis during instruction. In our school our ELL students are instructed based on their grade level and with age-appropriate materials. The classroom teacher will ensure that instruction is modified to meet the student's academic needs and/or educational goals. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? To support and supplement instruction provided to ESL students, all teachers are provided with a Bilingual Library/Leveled Library/Media Center in their classroom for use during independent study and/or independent reading. These areas include audiocassettes and CDs, phonics games, puzzles and flash cards, bilingual and picture dictionaries, trade books, periodical and newspaper activities, computers and tablets with internet capabilities and Smart Boards. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Since newly enrolled ELL students are identified in the Fall upon registration, once they are identified, the ESL teacher provides the students with a tour of the school. They are introduced to the Assistant Principal in charge of ELL instruction, the nurse, Guidance and other important personnel in the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Since we are a K-5 school, we don’t offer electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? It is our desire to provide rigorous, quality instruction to all students which provides high-challenge and high-support. To reach this objective we will continue to support all of our teachers in their growth as pedagogues by providing them with 2018-19 CEP 52  professional learning which focuses on on supporting all students improve reading comprehension. Planning is key to good instruction. Teachers are analyzing student data. They are aware of all the data available to them where they can see how their ELL students are performing in comparison to their English proficient students and also to see the varying degrees of need in the classroom. Looking at this data also gives them an idea of the linguistic and academic needs of the students. The Bilingual teachers in collaboration with the common branch teachers and the Assistant Principal will continue working on developing effective research based instructional strategies that support all learners. Teachers of ELLs receive professional development and guidance, as it pertains to ELLs, from both the Assistant Principal and Principal. In addition, teacher share provided with resources available to support them in scaffolding curriculum in both ELA and Math for teaching the fundamentals of languages . During the monthly grade level meeting, teachers are provided with their ELLs student data and strategies are shared for appropriate grouping and selecting supporting materials aligned with the common core learning standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The transition process from elementary to middle school tends to be very smooth for our ELL students. The families of all Ell students are provided with information and dates for Middle School open houses. Our Parent Coordinator provides workshops and meetings to support the parents in the selection of their child's Middle School. As required by CR Part 154 each school must provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. : Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? With the new systems in place at NYC DOE teachers are allotted time every Tuesday afternoon to conduct parent outreach and contact parents to keep them informed of student progress. Teachers will use this time whenever possible to schedule meetings with families to communicate with families about the progress of their ELL student. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS 159 has always provided parents with many opportunities to attend and participate in workshops that support them in supporting their children. Our parent coordinator Nereida Ramirez surveys the parents and what they would like learn more about and she then coordinates workshops to support all of our parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 53  2018-19 CEP 54 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Luis Liz, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Luis Munoz Marin Bilingual Sch School DBN: 10 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Luis Liz Title Principal Michelle Mendez Assistant Principal Nereid Ramirez Parent Coordinator Maria Diaz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Annette Berrios Coach Coach Moses Torres School Counselor Maribel Hulla Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 56 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X School Name: PS Superintendent: Mashel The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No MICHELE MENDEZ ASSISTANT PRINCIPAL YES FACELY GARCIA PUPIL ACCOUNTING SECRETARY NO YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The following data and methodologies were utilized to determine parents’ preferred language of communication: -Informal parent surveys -Home language survey -School report card data -Parent surveys 2018-19 CEP 57  -Oral translation request -Home Language Report (RHLA) from ATS. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral SPANISH ENGLISH ALBANIAN na 59.85 39.42 0.73 na 59.85 39.42 0 na 59.85 39.42 0.73 na 59.85 39.42 0 na 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. SPANISH, ENGLISH Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families The local community makeup is 95% Hispanic. We are an unzoned Bilingual school (Spanish), which serves this community and others not in our area. all notices, memorandums and other parent information communication is provided in Spanish as well as English. These findings were reported to the school community via the following: - School leadership team meeting - Monthly calendar All documents distributed to parents and guardians are provided in both English and Spanish languages. Monthly calendars, student progress reports, report cards, workshop invitations. This is ongoing from September to June. How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our office staff is 100% bilingual English/Spanish, Our faculty is 98% bilingual English/Spanish there is always someone present to translate any material and or information. If we encounter a language we are not able to communicate in, we will use the NYCDOE translation services for support 2018-19 CEP 58  - Parent coordinator workshops or meetings - Parents Association meetings - Parent memos - Weekly Newsletter per grade A translator is provided at all of the above-mentioned meetings. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? During the school year, we have many face-to-face meetings with parents. These meetings include but are not limited to: - Curriculum night September 2017 - Tuesday parent meetings, ongoing September 2017 to June 2018 - Curriculum night - Parent-teacher conferences (4) September, November, March and May - Tuesday parent meetings - Parent-teacher conferences - Parent workshops - Parent workshops Ongoing Monthly - Requested parent meetings with the teacher or other school staff - Requested parent meetings with the teacher or other school staff. ongoing daily. Our office staff is 100% bilingual English/Spanish, Our faculty is 98% bilingual English/Spanish there is always someone present to translate any material and or information. If we encounter a language we are not able to communicate in, we will use the NYCDOE translation services for support NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 59  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our office staff is 100% bilingual English/Spanish, Our faculty is 98% bilingual English/Spanish there is always someone present to translate any material and or information. If we encounter a language we are not able to communicate in, we will use the NYCDOE translation services for support Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff are informed of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance, during our beginning of the year staff meetings in September Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities regarding translation and interpretation services is shared with the parents. In addition, our school posts near the primary entrance a sign in each of the covered languages/most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services available for parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our parent coordinator provides workshops based on Parent needs surveys. After the surveys have been collected and analyzed we make the necessary adjustments to meet parent needs. 2018-19 CEP 60 
