2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X161 School Name: P.S. 161 PONCE DE LEON Principal: ELIAMARIE SOTO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Juan Ponce De Leon School 07x161 School Number (DBN): 320700010161 Pre K-5 th grade 628 Tinton Avenue Bronx, NY 10455 (718) 292-5478 Phone Number: (718) 292-5476 Fax: Eliamarie Soto Esoto2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Eliamarie Soto Email Address: Chapter Leaders: Michelle Morrison Martha Guzman Co-Chairs: Melissa Williams & Yma Torres SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Rosa Ramirez NA NA District Information Geographical District: 07x RafaelAlvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Avenue Room 102 Superintendent’s Office Address: Bronx, NY 10451 ralvare4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 742-6587 Phone Number: (718)742-6548 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Fordham Plaza Jose Ruiz FSC: Executive Director: One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 and 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: Fax: (718) 741-8895 (917) 608-0230 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Eliamarie Soto Michelle Morrison Martha Guzman Maribel Velez Rosa Ramirez Melissa Williams Yvette Ortiz Patricia Sample *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member / Teacher/ Co-Chair Member / Teacher Member / Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rosa Ramirez Yesenia Santiago Adriana Pina Angela Esposito Arlene Tirado Angelica Ramirez Yma Torres Member / Parent Member / Parent Member / Parent Member / Parent Member / Parent Member / Parent Member / Teacher / Co-Chair Member / Member / 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission, at P.S. 161, is to make our school child-centered in an environment of excellence. Through an open team approach involving our entire school community, we will create an atmosphere where children will show willingness to question, explore and share. We will in still a love of learning so that all our students can reach their full potential and become contributing members of society. We will foster lifelong goals of independent thinking, responsible citizenship, and an appreciation of individual differences, academic excellence and high standards. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The teachers of P.S. 161 immerse students in learning environments in which clear expectations are the norm. Teachers believe students learn best when actively engaged in purposeful and meaningful tasks which facilitate connections to both their personal lives and the world at large. Teachers empower students by sharing with them “where they are in their learning and where they need to be.” These conversations are driven by formative assessments which guide instruction in terms of modeling, large and small group instruction as well as individual needs. Students thus set goals based on this information and receive timely feedback from both teachers and peers to facilitate this endeavor. Rubrics and samples of finished work products guide students as they engage in their tasks and provide feedback to their peers. We continue to collaborate with various Community based organizations such as Asphalt Green, READ Alliance, Society of Educational for the Arts, Reading Rescue, Lincoln Center, Cool Cultures, Shubert Theatre, Fan4Kids, and Brain Power in order to support and enhance student achievement throughout the content areas. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 161 is comprised of a diverse population. We currently have 25% of our population are English language Learners and 29% are Students with Special needs. Many of our students continue to struggle with Social-Emotional needs, academic and also physical needs such as Physical therapy, Occupational Therapy or Speech and language needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of Growth / Strength for 2018-2019: Framework for Great Schools Element- Rigorous Instruction 1.1 Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards. (Quality Review Report and PPO visits ) School leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and content standards, and integrate the instructional shifts. Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data. Purposeful curricula decisions build and promote college and career readiness for all students so that the diversity of our learners, including English language learners and students with disabilities, are cognitively engaged in rigorous tasks across the grades. These decisions are based on the need to scaffold for many of our students who best learn through visual, auditory, kinesthetic, and tactile modalities. 2018-19 CEP 10  1.3 Make strategic organizational decisions to support the school’s instructional goals and meet student-learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products. (Quality Review Report and PPO Visits) The Principal uses resources and makes decisions effectively. The instructional partners of PS 161 are: Generation Ready coach which provides support for literacy to new and teachers in need of support for e.g. Cluster teachers, as well on upper grades 3-5. Read Alliance Tutors are assigned to first grade students. The school has established teacher grade leaders, a Read Alliance Site Coordinator for professional development. Imagine Learning is used to support the language development of students who speak English as a second language. Due to the data received on last years state exams, the Principal decided to use academic intervention programs throughout the all classes; scheduled daily 9:35-10:05. This brought about Frozen Time. The Principal structured Frozen Time to address all learners lowest third, now students performing in middle and upper levels will utilize this period for enrichment. Frozen time is based on a need going in 4-6 week cycles using a beginning, middle and end through a Guided Reading approach. The Principal has created a math cluster to support the instructional vision, established an effective grade leader structure and implemented a PBIS program to enhance the social emotional well being of the students. The Reading Rescue Program is unique as the lead educators are trained paraprofessionals working one to one with a student in need of fluency and decoding reading skills. 3.4 Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. (Quality Review Report and PPO Visits) School leaders consistently communicate high expectations (professionalism, instruction, communication, and other elements of Danielson Framework for Teaching) to the entire staff. Teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that consistently communicates high expectations for all students. School leaders provide training and have a system of accountability for set expectations. Teacher teams and staff offer ongoing and detailed feedback and guidance/advisement with each other to best serve their students. The Principal consistently communicates high expectations to the staff about professionalism, transparency and other elements of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. These expectations have focused on the importance of collaboration and thoughtful planning. This effort fostered the use of questioning techniques that provide more opportunities for students to engage in discussions requiring higher order thinking skills that simultaneously increased the level of rigor in classroom instruction. The Principal has provided professional learning in several topics to promote quality instruction topics such as how to use the Depth of Knowledge Wheel for scaffolding and engaging students in quality lessons. The Principal and Assistant Principal hold the school community accountable for implementing intervention and support strategies for struggling learners across classrooms. These expectations were shared with all families as well as grade specific newsletters are sent home. 4.1 Observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. 2018-19 CEP 11  The administrative cabinet has developed a schedule of observations that emphasizes the work outlined in the Danielson Framework for Teaching. As a pilot school for the Danielson work, the school community was able to utilize the resources of an Advance coach to further deepen staff understanding of the framework and further promote the professional growth of the staff. Instructional walks and rounds have been utilized to elevate instructional practice; these walks have been complemented by classroom visits, and subsequent professional conversations, conducted by the teacher leaders. The Teaching Matters coach has modeled lessons for all staff and then visited classes to assist teachers in implementing an observed practice thus further refining their instructional expertise. Professional learning opportunities focused on data and student work have been utilized to promote reflection and further strengthen teacher practice. Although systems are in place for teacher feedback, the documented evidence in the Advance portal demonstrates data still below the city expectation. As of March 9th the data registered was at 40% and is now currently below the 80 percentile. Areas of Focus for 2018-2019: Framework for Great Schools Element- Collaborative Teachers 1.2 Develop teacher pedagogy aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. Teacher pedagogy continues to be an area of focus. According to the last Quality Review Report and most recent PPO visits, across classrooms, teaching practices are becoming aligned to the curricula and are beginning to reflect a set of beliefs of how students learn best through discussion. The Danielson Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts are beginning to inform teaching practices. Inconsistent adherence to student discussion protocols and implementation of multiple entry points, results in students’ mixed engagement in appropriately challenging tasks and uneven demonstration of higher-order thinking skills in student work products. Based on this feedback as well as the student performance on the New York State English Language Arts and Mathematics Test, the focus area for this school year 2018-19 will be to support teachers with the implementation of rigorous, data-informed, and differentiated instruction, specifically in the area of literacy / Writing. At the beginning the last school year 2017-18, our school began using the Teachers College Reading and Writing Units to strengthened, grades K-5 in the areas of reading and writing. Teachers will continue to receive coaching and year-long support in planning and implementing effective interactive read- aloud, vocabulary, and reading comprehension instruction through guided reading and writing units by the Teachers College Reading and Writing project. Delivering instruction primarily through small groups will help to address the wide range of literacy needs of all students including our English language learners and students with special needs. Additional programs including Reading Rescue, READ Alliance, TITLE III and ELA / Math Academy after-school programs will continue to provide multiple entry points through tiered small group instruction for all our students. The Principal will continue to provide professional learning opportunities for all teachers to ensure that pedagogy is aligned with the expectations from the Danielson Framework for Teaching, in which students are engaged in rigorous academic discussions and are given the opportunity to demonstrate higher order thinking skills in their work products. Higher order thinking questions will help support the crafting of appropriately challenging activities and discussions that promote problem solving and critical thinking. The Principal, Assistant Principal’s and lead teacher’s will consistently revisit teacher practice regarding delivery of instruction. By implementing classroom visits amongst the grades, teachers will gain a better grasp in all areas of instruction such as : guided practice,opportunities to adjust curricula, as well as the use of formative assessments. This will strengthen, teacher’s ability to make tasks clear to students, support checking in for understanding as a 2018-19 CEP 12  formative assessment practice , and support student groups discussion / engagement. This will continue to support and help maintain our school wide norms for implementing formative assessments, small learning communities, student self-assessment opportunities, as well as teacher to student conferencing. Framework for Great Schools Element- Collaborative Teachers 2.2 Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. (Last PPO Visits for 2017-2018) Deepen the work around formative assessment practices, strategies and tools. Work with your professional development team, grade leaders, and teachers-at-large in order to evolve a shared understanding of standards aligned tasks, activities, assessment criteria, and assessment tools. Continue to support teachers to further develop the capacity to engage in checking for understanding in varying ways, memorializing the data, making on-the-spot adjustments in same and subsequent lessons, and providing students with actionable feedback. In this way, teachers may engage in increased opportunities to refine how they give actionable feedback and use this information to adjust curricular and instruction decisions. Further enhance how students use actionable feedback which will help them to know what they do well and what their next steps are. Simultaneously, students will have increased opportunities to engage in self-reflection and self-monitoring activities that promote student ownership of their learning. and tools. Work with your professional development team, grade leaders, and teachers-at-large in order to evolve a shared understanding of standards aligned tasks, activities, assessment criteria, and assessment tools. Continue to support teachers to further develop the capacity to engage in checking for understanding in varying ways, memorializing the data, making on-the-spot adjustments in same and subsequent lessons, and providing students with actionable feedback. In this way, teachers may engage in increased opportunities to refine how they give actionable feedback and use this information to adjust curricular and instruction decisions. Further enhance how students use actionable feedback which will help them to know what they do well and what their next steps are. Simultaneously, students will have increased opportunities to engage in self-reflection and self-monitoring activities that promote student ownership of their learning. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X161 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 523 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 44 44 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 49 41 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 92.5% % Reduced Lunch 16.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 73.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 37.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 80% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 47 48 89.3% 3.1% 25.8% 23.5% 0.4% 1.3% 4 0% 7.8 33.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO YSH NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per our last Quality Review Report and most recent PPO visits last school year 2017-18, school leaders and faculty members will continue to ensure that curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and content standards, and integrate the instructional shifts. Curriculum and academic tasks will be planned and refined using student work and data. Purposeful curricula decisions will build coherence and promote college and career readiness for all students so that a diversity of learners, including our English Language Learners and students with disabilities, are cognitively engaged in rigorous tasks across grades and subjects (1.1) To continue to improve the implementation of Common Core aligned instruction across the grades, curriculum maps, assessments, and instructional resources (Specifically Teachers College Readers and Writing Project Units ) and tiered instruction will be implemented within and across grade bands to ensure cohesive instruction. To reach our English Language Learners and students with disabilities, researched based strategies and creative teacher initiatives will be shared and presented to others during professional development sessions, inter-visitations, and common planning periods across all grade bands on a monthly basis. Teachers will continue to use and /or create assessments, rubrics, and grading policies that are aligned with the school’s curricula. The school will continue to use common assessments to determine student progress toward goals and across grades and subject areas. Aligned assessments will provide actionable feedback to students and teachers regarding student achievement. The results will then be used to adjust curricula and instruction. Thus, assessments and rubrics will continue to be carefully designed to reflect the differentiation embedded in curricula. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 8% increase in student writing assessments evidenced by the benchmark assessments in the Teachers College Units of study. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activity # 1: Data Analysis In order to facilitate gains as well as monitor and revise curriculum, we will continue to analyze data derived from various data systems, including benchmark testing and progress monitoring. This will help establish initial goals for teachers/students, as well as group students strategically in English Language Arts and Math subgroups. Teachers will have regular conferences with students in order to address their strengths, weaknesses, and next steps. They will continue to provide structured remedial intervention for at-risk students during the allotted Frozen Time period in the daytime. We will have a data wall so that instructional teacher teams and others will have general access to the use of disaggregated student data. This will include the use of cross curriculum data focusing on overall student improvement. Grade teams and grade bands (K-2, 3-5) will share and review data, student work, and instructional plans, and continue with the focus of research and data driven planning meetings in order to make informed decisions regarding curriculum. (On a monthly basis from October,2018-June,2019). Teachers will use student work and data to focus on how to best implement rigorous CCLS aligned performance tasks. These tasks are derived from multiple instructional resources used by the school such as Teachers’ College and Go Math for grades 3rd-5th grades. Activity #2: Professional Development Due to the shift in curriculum, grade leaders will continue to focus on vertically aligning the new Teachers’ College Reading and Writing curriculum according to the progression of the Common Core Learning Standards. These grade leaders will All classroom and out of classroom teachers On a monthly basis from Sept., 2018-June,2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, external Staff Developers, Instructional Specialists and Data Specialist 2018-19 CEP 16  continue to collaborate with their respective grade teams to create a cohesive yearlong curriculum map and to develop specific strategies for English Language Learners and students with special needs. Weekly grade team meetings, structured inter-visitations, and additional Teachers’ College professional development by assigned coaches for the lower and upper-grades will allow teachers to enhance their pedagogy. In addition to curriculum based professional development classroom and cluster teachers will continue to participate in Professional Learning Communities based on teachers’ pedagogical needs and interests. These will consist of book studies, inquiry-based research and application of strategies and inter-visitations. Professional Learning Communities will share their findings with the rest of the school community by June, 2019 during our annual Share-Fair. Principal and Assistant Principals will monitor the use of data binders and how it informs instruction through formal and information observations, discussions, and monthly one to one data assessment meetings. Data will also be used to determine which subgroups of students will be targeted for the ELA / Math Prep Academy, Title III After-School Program, Frozen Time groups including RTI, Academic Intervention for reading and math, as well as for First-Grade Reading Rescue and READ Alliance students. Activity #3: ADVANCE System (Teacher Effectiveness) The Danielson Framework will serve as the main tool for instructional planning and development of teacher pedagogy. Initial conferences will provide teachers with individualized goals and areas of focus for the school year. Timely and specific feedback will facilitate teacher reflection and growth throughout the year. Components of the Framework that are areas of focus for the majority of teachers will be among the topics presented in the Professional Learning Communities throughout the school year 2018-19. All classroom and out of classroom teachers On a Monthly basis from Sept.2018-June,2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, external Staff Developers, Instructional Specialists and Data Specialist 2018-19 CEP 17  Principal, Assistant Principals, external Staff Developers, Instructional Specialists and Data Specialist All classroom and out of classroom teachers On a monthly basis from Sept.,2018-June,2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core by providing them with Literacy, Math, Science / Social Studies and Health opportunities throughout the year. Professional Development workshops will be held at least Once a month for Parent Engagement Events that will focus on these areas. Various organizations such as Literacy Night(with support from the READ Project, Reading Rescue, Lincoln Center, Math Game Night, Brain Power sessions, Yoga Clinics, Bronx Arts Ensemble, Society of Arts, Fan4Kids nutrition 2018-19 CEP 18  workshops will all help provide support and understanding of the alignment with the Common Core Learning standards for Parents and families. Personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, Classroom teachers, Parent Coordinator, external Staff Developers, and Instructional Specialists. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Arrangement of common preps built into master schedule ● Teacher team discussions regarding assessment ● Use of Teacher designed assessments ● Instructional Leads collaboration on curriculum mapping ● Administrative ADVANCE observations, Teacher voting process for designated meeting times ● Teacher surveys given at beginning of the school year, in order to tier PD opportunities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 4% increase in student writing assessments evidenced by the benchmark assessments in the Teachers College Units of study. We will continue to monitor the progress in various areas such as: PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT- Teacher surveys / Exit tickets will be collected by the Administrators in order to oversee the provision of multiple and varied professional development opportunities pertinent to the teachers’ and students’ needs. The Literacy and Math consultants will deliver these workshops as they pertain to the current units of study along with general best practices. The NTC Mentoring program, will have monthly support logs for new teachers . ADVANCE- Administrators will conduct middle of year conferences using the ADVANCE system to continue to observe growth in instructional practices throughout the school community. Parent Engagement- Parent / teacher sign-in sheets and teacher logs of interaction will be handed in to administrators on an on-going basis. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress throughout the year, will be the Teachers College Units of study, By February 2019, there will be a 4% increase in student writing assessments evidenced by the 2018-19 CEP 19  benchmark assessments in the Teachers College Units of study. We will continue to monitor the progress in various areas such as: PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT- Teacher surveys / Exit tickets will be collected by the Administrators in order to oversee the provision of multiple and varied professional development opportunities pertinent to the teachers’ and students’ needs. The Literacy and Math consultants will deliver these workshops as they pertain to the current units of study along with general best practices. The NTC Mentoring program, will have monthly support logs for new teachers . ADVANCE- Administrators will conduct middle of year conferences using the ADVANCE system to continue to observe growth in instructional practices throughout the school community. Parent Engagement- Parent / teacher sign-in sheets and teacher logs of interaction will be handed in to administrators on an on-going basis. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In order to continue to decrease our number of teacher removals, school suspensions, and support our students with the best strategies to control and manage positive behaviors we continue to look at our data tracking sources such as : The 2017-18 NYC School Survey, OORS reports, and ATS attendance reports. Our schools PBIS point system, Guidance Counselors monthly meeting discussions, Brain Power Class Ambassadors,and our monthly Wise Skills calendar proactively address these students’ behaviors by the implementation of the Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) Initiative. Through PBIS, Brain Power exercises, and the WISE Skills Character Program, students are more predisposed to socially acceptable behaviors that are directly taught, regularly practiced in a natural environment, and followed by frequent positive reinforcement with the STAR school motto, “Act like a Star, Look Like a Star, Speak like a Star, Be a Star.” as we continue to reduce our incidents and school suspensions rate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students in the school community will participate in PBIS initiatives, resulting in a 5% decrease in school wide occurrences and suspensions compared to the number of incidents, as measured by last years 2017-2018 DOE OORS reports. 2018-19 CEP 21 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students in K-5 Sept.2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Classroom Teachers, Counselors, Brain power Reps. and School Aides Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activity #1: Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS) Initiative – PBIS is a process for creating safer and more effective schools. It is a systems approach to enhancing the capacity of schools to educate all children by developing research-based, school-wide classroom behavior support systems. PBIS provides an operational framework for achieving these outcomes. More importantly, PBIS is NOT a curriculum, intervention, or practice, but a decision making framework that guides behavioral practices for improving behavior outcomes for all students (SOP 5.2) Increased star points on a daily and weekly basis evaluate the effectiveness of the PBIS initiative. School leaders and all staff members award stars points for STAR behavior. All students have the ability to earn 35 points on a weekly basis and additional points for exemplary conduct. The rubric for what is considered star behavior is displayed throughout the school building are also displayed and connected to the rubric for the school motto of: “Act like a Star, Look like a Star, Speak like a Star, Be a Star”. Students are given an opportunity to exchange star points for tangible reward. A PBIS Committee has been structured with at least one member from a cross section of the school personnel to discuss student behavior referrals. PBIS team members have attended professional development on implementation of PBIS and use of SWIS. On a monthly basis during common preps, one PBIS Committee member will present and discuss data and that month’s targeted WISE skill. Additionally, during this time teachers will provide their feedback as to the overall behavioral climate within their classrooms , the number of Brain Power Class Ambassadors and exchange ideas for new behavioral strategies. Activity #2 WISE Skills – 2018-19 CEP 22  A comprehensive interdisciplinary character education program that helps schools, families and communities equip students with critical character qualities they need to be successful. Wise Skills has progressive school wide goals that lead to overall school success in helping students develop both performance character and moral character. As a result: (1) Student’s character is impacted, (2) School climate improves, (3) Instructional time increases, (4) Academic achievement grows, and (5) A positive learning environment is created .The school component helps schools model, teach and reinforce good character through interdisciplinary classroom activities. (SOP 5.2, 5.5) School leaders and all staff members can evaluate the Wise Skills character education program as students speak to the expectations of appropriate school behavior and the targeted monthly skill displayed throughout the school and on a specific bulletin board in every classroom. All School leaders and teachers monitor student’s daily actions with one another in classroom discussions and peer-to-peer assessments. Assemblies afford them opportunities to share ideas and their points of view, thus giving them a voice of expression in a risk-free environment. In addition to their teachers, support personnel provide students with one-to-one or small group guidance on a frequent basis leading to reflective conversations that inform them on making favorable decisions that positively impact their daily interactions and school work. All guidance counselors have an opportunity to attend the Life Space Crisis Intervention Workshop to learn strategies to de-escalate students in crisis in order to support the WISE Skills program. School -wide activities, such as Anti-Bullying Assemblies, help foster these positive behavioral strategies and conflict resolution skills. Students with special emotional needs have opportunities to role-play a myriad of scenarios to practice utilizing these strategies. English Language Learners have access to read alouds in their native language that focus on positive behavior and character education. Parents are included in this program by opening up Parent Engagement Tuesdays for parents/guardians to collaborate with teachers to brainstorm effective behavioral strategies. Activity #3 School-Wide Information System (SWIS) – SWIS is a comprehensive and confidential web-based information system, to collect, summarize, and use student behavior data for decision-making. The five basic reports in SWIS frame the context Students in K-5 Sept.2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Classroom Teachers, Counselors, School Aides 2018-19 CEP 23 Students in K-5 Feb.2019-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Counselors, School Aides within which problem behaviors occur at school helping teams to answer these questions: A) How often do referrals occur? (B) What problem behaviors occur most frequently in our building? (C) Where are problem behaviors likely to occur? (D) When are problem behaviors most likely to occur? and (E) Which students are involved in referrals? (SOP 5.2, 5.5) On a monthly basis, key personnel and out of classroom staff i.e., counselors will review school-wide referral patterns of classroom infractions as well as out of classroom incidents through five basic reports to evaluate current behavioral interventions for their effectiveness in decreasing and preventing behavior incidents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be introduced to our PBIS system in September, 2018 at their first Parent-Teacher Conference by the school Principal. They will be kept updated by the classroom teacher, PBIS Committee, monthly Newsletters, monthly calendars, Parent Meetings and Java Mondays once a month in order to support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School leaders and staff have collaboratively created a safe environment that is responsive to the social emotional needs of all students. Through ongoing meetings spanning from school-wide to classroom community forums, students understand the qualities of positive behavior by enunciating that in order to be recognized and acknowledged, there are four important steps to take: “Act like a Star, Look like a Star, Speak like a Star, Be a Star.” This school-motto is the driving motivation that has students talking about how respect, learning and good attendance contribute to their social emotional growth and academic success. The WISE skills character education program delivered by classroom teachers helps to instill the critical character qualities needed to be successful students and vital parts of our community through the use of skits, reflective journal writing and focus worksheets. Teachers also enhance skills through related texts and Brain Power Professional Development sessions. Key personnel / out of classroom staff, i.e., counselors, will monitor and gather out of classroom and in classroom behavior data to input into (SWIS) to continually meet the behavioral needs of our student body. Monetary resources provided for the PBIS help supply the incentives for the “Star Cart.” This “Star Cart” visits each classroom every Friday during which students are given the opportunity to cash in their PBIS star points for prizes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of the implementation of the school-wide PBIS program, there will be a 3 % decrease in the number of suspensions and incidents, as measured by the OORS report for the period of September 2018 to February 2019, compared to the number of suspensions and incidents, as measured by the OORS report for the period of September 2017 to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments used to assess the progress being made in Positive Behavior by February 2019, will be the increase in amount of students receiving student of the month showcases, PBIS star points, Brain Power Class Ambassadors, and reduced school-wide occurrence and suspension rate evidenced by the DOE Oors systems monthly reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the last 2017-2018 PPO visits identified teacher teams inquiry and the leadership development as among an area of celebration. The majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations. Distributed leadership structures are in place. Effective collaborations promote the achievement of school goals and implementation of Common Core Learning Standards, and strengthen the instructional capacity of teachers. Teachers have a voice in key decisions that promote shared leadership and improve student learning. (4.2) In addition, across classrooms teachers use or create assessments, rubrics, and rating policies that are aligned with the school’s curriculum. The school uses common assessments to determine students progress toward goals across grades and subject areas. Aligned assessments provide actionable feedback to students and teachers regarding student achievements and the results are used to adjust curricula and instruction. (2.2) An area to focus for this school year according to the feedback received from the last Quality Review Report, was to provide consistent teaching strategies that would enable students to have multiple entry points into the curricula. We will continue to use the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the instructional shifts as a guide to inform our teaching practices. We will focus on providing consistent adherence to student discussion protocols and implementation of multiple entry points, that will result in an increase of students engagement in appropriately challenging tasks and a progressive demonstration of higher-order thinking skills in student work products. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of collaborative teacher teams' focus on the analysis of formative and summative assessments to inform teachers' planning and instruction, there will be a 5% increase in the number of students scoring at level 3 and 4, as measured by spring 2019 NYS ELA exam, compared to the number of students who scored level 3 and 4 on the spring 2018 NYS ELA exam. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activity #1.DATA ANALYSIS- In order to facilitate gains as well as monitor and revise curriculum we will analyze data derived from various data systems to help establish initial goals for teachers/students, as well as group students strategically in ELA and Math subgroups. Throughout the school year, bi-monthly school-wide inquiry teams, monthly grade inquiry teams and teacher team meetings will share and review data and student work in an effort to appropriately modify and design effective instruction to meet all students’ needs. (SOP 4.3, 4.5.) All classroom and out of classroom teachers On a monthly basis from Sept.2018-June,2019 Activity #2. ADVANCE- - We will fully participate in the ADVANCE-Teacher Effectiveness Program to purposefully evaluate and adjust curricular and instructional practices in response to student learning needs and the expectations of the CCLS. Teacher effectiveness in using various forms of data will be evaluated in order to plan instruction that improves student outcomes as measured by NYS summative assessments and levels. To meet the needs of students from various subgroups and push them to the next level, classroom and cluster teachers will differentiate instruction and establish a shared language about instruction School administrators can use this to better understand where teachers in their schools excel and where they need additional support. (SOP 4.3, 4.5) Activity #3. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT- All classroom and out of classroom teachers On a monthly basis from Sept.2018-June,2019 We will continue to enhance our teacher pedagogy through cycles of targeted professional development and structured inter-visitations. The professional development committee alongside administration will organize a beginning of year survey inquiring teacher interest and needs of growth so that professional development can be more tailored to pedagogical needs. Throughout this process, these professional learning communities will take an inquiry approach by identifying, implementing, assessing, revising, and sharing research-based strategies in action. We will continue tiered professional development with our curriculum's, which are comprehensive Common Core aligned programs. This along with ongoing professional development and web-based systems, data All classroom and out of classroom teachers On a monthly basis from Sept.2018-June,2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Professional Development Committee, Inquiry Team, Data Specialist, Consultants, District Instructional Specialist Principal, Assistant Principals, Professional Development Committee, Inquiry Team, Data Specialist, Consultants, District Instructional Specialist Principal, Assistant Principals, Professional Development Committee, 2018-19 CEP 27 collection and analysis, unit goals, and data driven decision-making, will support teachers in designing rigorous and challenging tasks that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. (SOP 4.3, 4.5) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers by providing them with a variety of strategies that can be applied such as a tool kit during our Family Engagement sessions with topics ranging in Literacy, Math, Science/Social Studies and Health throughout the year from September, 2018-June, 2019. Professional Development workshops will be held at least Once a month during Parent Engagement Events that will focus on these areas. Various organizations such as Literacy Night (with support from the READ Project, Reading Rescue, Lincoln Center), Math Game Night, Brain Power Events, Yoga Clinics, Bronx Arts Ensemble, Society for the Arts, Fan4Kids nutrition workshops will all help provide support and understanding of the alignment with the Common Core Learning standards for Parents and families. Personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, Classroom teachers, Parent Coordinator, external Staff Developers, and Instructional Specialists. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common preps will continue to be built into the master schedule and will be deliberately structured such that Grade-teams have substantial and regular meetings that result in improved teacher practice, increase in student engagement, and mastery of goals for groups of students. Furthermore, monthly inquiry teams composed of staff from the various constituencies will systematically share and analyze student work in order to generate next steps using the District Wide DDI protocols during all team meetings. We will also have Professional development workshops during common preps, weekly professional development Mondays and built into full-day Chancellor Conference Days. Professional development surveys will identify areas of strength and weakness in order to provide a framework for supporting teacher development. Teachers will continue to use this framework to reflect on their practice and discuss professional growth with school Administrators and colleagues. These professional Learning Communities will come together throughout the year to share best practices with a culminating activity ("School-Wide Share Fair") taking place during our June, 2019 Chancellor's Day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 28  By February 2019, as a result of collaborative teacher teams' focus on the analysis of formative and summative assessments to inform teachers' planning and instruction, there will be a 3 % increase in the number of students scoring at level 3 and 4, as measured by mid year IReady ELA assessment exam, compared to the number of students who scored level 3 and 4 on the mid year 2018 IReady ELA assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, 1. DATA ANALYSIS- The use of data binders, formal and informal observations, discussions, and monthly one-to-one data / assessment meetings. The use of a data wall so that instructional teacher teams and other stakeholders will have general access to the use of disaggregated student data. Consultants and instructional coaches will provide data analysis support after each Interim Assessment administration based on our District wide assessment calendar to ensure the continuous modification of goals and instruction based on relevant and current data. 2. ADVANCE- Administrators will continue to have discussions with teachers based on their observation cycles throughout the year. The data specialist, instructional leads, classroom, cluster, and out-of-classroom teachers will work collaboratively to collect and analyze data as well as to share best practices as observed by supervisors and fellow colleagues during monthly grade-team meetings. 3. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT- The Professional Development Committee and Administrators will ensure and oversee the provision of multiple and various tiered professional developments opportunities on a 6-8 week cycle which will reflect the teachers’ and students’ needs. Instructional specialists, outside professional development consultants, classroom teachers, and out of classroom teachers, will deliver these workshops as they pertain to the current units of study along with general best practices. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Commencing in October 2018-June 2019, the administrative cabinet will continue the use of the Danielson Framework / ADVANCE observation system in order to conduct targeted and frequent observations. These observations will continue to help track progress of teacher practices based on student data, feedback from PPO Visits and professional development opportunities. The ADVANCE system will continue to hold administrators and staff members accountable for continuous improvement, evidenced by a 5% increase in Domain 3. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school leaders' providing all teachers with differentiated professional development, based on their individual strengths and needs, at least 80 % of all teachers will receive end of year MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson Framework for Teaching components 3b, 3c, 3d, as measured by 2018-2019 end of year MOTP ratings in Advance. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activity # 1: Data Analysis Beginning of year data will serve as the main tool for establishing initial goals for instructional flexible groups and individual students. Grades 3, 4, and 5 will also utilize New York State Exam results and item analysis based on the Common Core Learning Standards to further inform targeted instruction for strategy groups. Teachers will closely analyze student work with the use of school-wide vertically aligned rubrics to provide timely and specific feedback, plan next steps, and adjust instruction as needed. During weekly common planning meetings, grade teams will share and review data in order to identify common trends so that unit plans can be modified. Strategies, tasks, and supports to be implemented will be shared amongst the grade to help promote growth for all students, especially for English language learners and students with disabilities. Activity #2: Professional Development All classroom and cluster teachers will participate in school-wide professional development by taking an inquiry approach for a specific area of focus. Professional Learning Communities will identify a strategy, implement it, assess its effectiveness, and share their findings with the school community. Specific Teachers’ College professional development will provide teachers with tools for formative assessments within the structured lessons so that teachers can appropriately modify their instruction while still reaching the objectives of the unit. Activity #3: ADVANCE System (Teacher Effectiveness) The Danielson Framework will serve as the main tool for instructional planning and development of teacher pedagogy. Initial conferences will provide teachers with individualized goals and areas of focus for the school year. Timely and specific feedback will facilitate teacher reflection and growth throughout the year. Components of the Framework that are areas of focus for the majority of teachers will be among the topics presented in the Professional Learning Communities. Yearlong mentoring Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept.2018-June,2019 All classroom and out of classroom teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, external Staff Developers, District Instructional Specialists and Data Specialist Sept.2018-June,2019 All classroom and out of classroom teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, external Staff Developers, District Instructional Specialists and Data Specialist Sept.2018-June,2019 All classroom and out of classroom teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, external Staff Developers, District Instructional Specialists and Data Specialist 2018-19 CEP 31 will continue to be provided to new teachers to address data collection and analysis along with instructional expectations. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. "We will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership by providing them with a variety of strategies that can be applied such as a tool kit during our Literacy, Math, Science/Social Studies and Health opportunities throughout the year, in order to support their children at home. Professional Development workshops will be held at least Once a month for Parent Engagement Events that will focus on these areas. Various organizations such as Literacy Night (with support from the READ Project, Reading Rescue), Math Game Night, Brain Power, Yoga Clinics, Fan4Kids nutrition workshops will all help provide support and understanding of the alignment with the Common Core Learning standards for Parents and families. Personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, Classroom teachers, Parent Coordinator, external Staff Developers, and Instructional Specialists. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Arrangement of common preps built into master schedule and schedule adjustments ● Teacher team discussions regarding assessment ● Use of Teacher designed assessments ● Instructional Leads collaboration on curriculum mapping / instructional resources ● Teacher voting process for designated meeting times, including teacher per-session /per diem and Supervisor per session ● Teacher Inter-class visitations and teachers included in walk-throughs ● Teacher surveys given at beginning of the year, in order to tier PD opportunities and human resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of school leaders' providing all teachers with differentiated professional development, based on their individual strengths and needs, at least 40 % of all teachers will receive at least 2 MOTP ratings of 2018-19 CEP 32  Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson Framework for Teaching components 3b, 3c, 3d, as measured by MOTP ratings in Advance during the period of September 2018 to February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. DATA ANALYSIS- Administrators, data specialist, all classroom / out of classroom teachers will continue to monitor student data from various assessments to focus on designing CCLS aligned tasks that promote higher order thinking skills. Teacher teams and other stakeholders will have general access to the use of disaggregated student data on our data wall. This will include the use of cross curriculum data focusing on overall student improvement. The Literacy & Math Consultants will continue to provide data analysis support after each Interim Assessment administration based on our district Wide Assessment calendar in order to ensure the continuous modification of goals and instruction based on this relevant and current data. 2. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT- Administrators will ensure and oversee the provision of multiple and varied professional development opportunities pertinent to the teachers’ and students’ needs. The Literacy and Math consultants will deliver these workshops as they pertain to the current units of study along with general best practices on a 6-8 week calendar cycle(s ). 3. ADVANCE- Administrators will continue to conduct initial and end of year conferences with the use of the Danielson Framework as the observational tool . The using of the ADVANCE system will continue to help us observe the growth in Instructional practices throughout the school community. The data specialist, instructional leads, classroom, cluster, and out-of-classroom teachers will continue to work collaboratively to collect and analyze data as well as to share best practices as observed by supervisors and fellow colleagues. At this point in the year, assistant principals will evaluate growth from BOY to MOY benchmarks and share this collective data with grade leaders and teacher teams in order to plan next steps and student action plans. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to continue to build Strong Family and Community Ties, the school leadership will continue to bring various resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Teachers will communicate with parents with the help of the parent coordinator to invite parents to workshops. Parents can be involved in Learning Leaders, workshops, and family nights in order to continue to build a stronger relationship between the school and our families. The need to bring awareness and collaboration between the school community and student families has been a consistent struggle for the past few years. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be at least a 5% increase in the number of parents attending school-wide meetings, events, and activities, as measured by the 2018-2019 Parent Coordinator Activity Report, compared to the number of parents attending school-wide meetings, events, and activities, as measured by the 2017-2018 Parent Coordinator Activity Report. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activity #1-Parental Involvement and Engagement: In order to promote student achievement through increased parental involvement and engagement, we will survey parents and teachers to determine areas of need. Subsequently, we will use this information to help us determine the best support activities and professional development to offer parents in order to facilitate their involvement and efforts at home with their children. During parent conferences, open houses, and recruitment events for Pre-K/Kindergarten, parents will be informed of grade level expectations for each grade through printed guides available in various languages. Additionally, our parent coordinator will facilitate technology workshops in the computer lab in order to access each child’s academic/assessment profile using New York City Schools Account program. New York City and New York State assessment calendars, monthly curriculum workshops, and monthly newsletters will inform and empower parents to assist their children in becoming college and career ready. Also, parents will be encouraged to become active participants and take on leadership roles through their participation in the School Leadership Team (SLT) and Parent Association on a yearly basis. Finally, to further facilitate parental involvement and engagement, parents will be invited to monthly school-wide celebrations such as: publishing parties, award assemblies, attendance recognition, spirit day, career day, Curriculum Literacy Day/Night, Holiday Winter Extravaganza Show, Curriculum Math game nights, Java Monday, and movie nights throughout the school year. (SOP 6.2, 6.5) Activity #2 Home-School Communication: We will continue to build and support home-school relationships and improve communication by conducting Parent-Teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed. Parents will also be encouraged to attend Parent Engagement Tuesdays where they can meet with their child’s teacher to discuss concerns or questions from 2:30-3:35. Furthermore, parents will be provided with timely information regarding their child’s individual performance/assessment profiles (i.e. Progress reports in October/January) and other pertinent school information through the use of our schools’ Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Prek-5th grade Parents On a monthly basis from Sept.2018-June, 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principals, Classroom /Cluster Teachers, internal and external Staff Developers, Data Specialist All Pre-K-5th grade Parents On a monthly basis from Sept.2018-June,2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principals, Classroom /Cluster Teachers, internal and external Staff Developers, Data Specialist 2018-19 CEP 35 All PreK-5th grade Parents On a monthly basis from Sept.2018-June,2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principals, Classroom /Cluster Teachers, internal and external Staff Developers, Data Specialist monthly calendar and school messenger phone system. The day before an event, parents will be contacted by phone system. The first week of each month calendars will be distributed to students. Additionally we will convene an Annual Title I Parent Meeting each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved. In order to facilitate our home-school communication efforts, we will uphold the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services. By doing this we can ensure their full participation in their child’s education. (SOP 6.3) Activity #3 Parent Support: In order to provide parents with multiple opportunities of supports, we will arrange for the following: provide information related to school activities, programs, and meetings in a format and language that parents can understand; arrange for additional meetings at other flexible times; involve parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and the Parent Association; ensure that the Parent Involvement Policy of the Parent Association are distributed and discussed with parents each year; conduct parent workshops with topics that include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability e.g., ESSA./ State accountability system, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; Nutrition, Health, Safety, Common Core Learning Standards, Rosetta Stone, JAVA Mondays with the Principal (first Monday of each month), Parent trips to various city museums starting in October, Family Affairs, etc. In addition, we will allow for the reasonable access to staff by ensuring staff have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents and notifying them of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member. The aforementioned activities and opportunities for parental involvement will be facilitated by the proper allocation of Title I funds as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy. Finally, we will advise parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary Education Act Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs. (SOP 6.2, 6.5) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Various organizations support our family and community engagement such as the READ Project, Reading Rescue, Asphalt Green, Brain Power, Yoga Clinics, Fan4Kids nutrition workshops, NY CARES, Cool Culture and Lincoln Center. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Activity #1 Parental Involvement and Engagement: The following resources will be used to support this activity: Survey will be given to parents at Parent- Teacher Conferences to assess parent interest in workshops. Schedule of parent workshops will be sent to school families in English and Spanish, “JAVA Mondays” discussions with school principal will occur on a monthly basis, Distribution of Parent Testing Calendar and reminders when testing is near, Title I parent involvement funding, day and evening workshops to access working parents, Increased attendance of parents/families at workshops, Distribution of Principal Report at PA monthly meetings, Family participation during various family-oriented events/workshops. Monthly Parent Association meetings, weekly Parent-Engagement Tuesdays, and Stay Connected Email program are all resources that will be used to achieve this annual goal. Activity #2 Home-School Communication: The following resources will be used to support this activity: Monthly school calendars distributed announcing important testing information and activities/events, teacher newsletters, School Messenger, an electronic system that calls student’s homes notifying parents of important school dates and activities in both languages., Progress Reports letter sent to the parents distributed twice a year (Winter /Spring), Report Cards, Parent Teacher Conferences, Promotion in Doubt notices and meetings. Activity #3 Parent Support: The following resources will be used to support this activity: Under Title I the school will coordinate meetings with parents such as, our monthly Parent–Teacher Association meetings, the Principal’s Java Monday meetings, DOE NYC Parent Link training sessions, specific parent grade level meetings. Our Parent Coordinator and the Parent–Teacher Association President will ensure that school information is provided via newsletters and / or memos sent home. Specific meetings are held to discuss Title I Funding and activities such as the School Leadership Team Meetings. Surveys are given to parents to gather data on programs and the feedback is shared with the entire school community. Varied workshops and / or classes will continue to be held in order to support our parents. Additionally, reasonable access to staff will be provided by making sure they have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of school-wide efforts to improve parental involvement, there will be a 3 % increase in the number of parents attending school-wide activities, meetings, and events, as measured by the Parent Coordinator Activity Report for the period of September 2018 to February 2019, compared to the number of parents attending 2018-19 CEP 37  school-wide activities, meetings, and events, as measured by the Parent Coordinator Activity Report for the period of September 2017 to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, there will be at least a 3 % increase of parent participation as evidenced by workshop and event sign in sheets, increased number of parents participating in monthly Tuesday Parent Engagement events and will be evident by measurable gains in student achievement seen in formative and summative assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 1.Struggling Students who score a Level 1 or 2 on the NYS ELA Exam 2. Struggling readers 3. Students who are on the cusp and scored within the ranges of : 2.46-2.99 on the NYS ELA State Exam 4.ELL students in grades Kdg.-5 th grade 5. 1st grade students struggling readers 1.Struggling Students 2. Students who are on the cusp and scored within the ranges of : 2.46-2.99 on the NYS Math Exam Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1. Small Group 1.During the day 2 . Individual tutoring is provided 2.During the day 3.After School 4. After School 5. After School 3.Small Group 4. Small Group 5. Small Group 1.Small group 1.During the day 2.Small group 2.After School 1.Academic Intervention Specialist 2.Reading Intervention 3.ELA Prep Academy After School Intervention 4.Title III After School Intervention program for ELL Students 5. READ alliance after school 1. The AIS Math Teacher provides students targeted academic support by providing differentiated math instruction. 2. Math Prep Academy 2018-19 CEP 39  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 1.Struggling students in 3 rd , 4 th or 5 th grades 1.Struggling students in 3 rd , 4 th or 5 th grades 1. At risk students that need counseling in conflict resolution, character education, therapeutic strategies and social skills building. 1. Science Intervention 1.Social Studies Intervention 1.Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, and Social Worker provide at risk counseling 1. Small Group 1. During the day 1.Small Group 1.During the day 1.Individual and small groups 1.During the day 2.Pull out or push-in 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 73 Students in Temporary Housing, which may change over the course of the school year in 2018-19. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Title I set-aside funds are used primarily for educational services in order to ensure that our Students in Temporary Housing population progress academically. These Title I funds will be used to pay for emergency supplies listed below: 1) uniforms 2) school supplies 3) books 4) Replacement of broken glasses / repairing of glasses 5) Academic Programs & educational support services 6) Basic emergency supplies : Sweatshirts, Sweatpants, socks,and undergarments 7) Attendance Incentives 8) Intervention programs Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS NA 2018-19 CEP 41 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Strategies for attracting Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Recruitment ● Administrative staff will regularly attend hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly qualified teachers for our school. ● Our pupil personnel secretary will work closely with our District 7 HR point to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. ● Administration will continue to provide a supportive school community where collaboration, commitment and dedication are fostered. ● We will continue to support the teachers in their ongoing education which will lead to the completion of a license / tenure making them highly qualified teachers in their area of expertise and licensing. ● We will reach out to our District 7 Human Resources department as well as local universities such as Bank Street, New York University, Fordham University, Lehman and Mercy College for potential graduates that will be the best match for our school community. ● We will provide professional development opportunities for newly hired teachers to enhance their professional growth as well as participate in the development of curriculum. ● School leaders, teacher peers, and Mentors support the development of teachers, including those new to the profession, with effective feedback and next steps from a strategic use of short, frequent cycles of classroom observation and student work/data. Retention, Assignments and Supports ● Teachers throughout the school will be provided with high quality professional development across the grades to support teachers in implementing instruction in accordance with the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 43  ● We will continue to support teachers in designing rigorous and challenging tasks that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. ● Administration will continue to provide a supportive school community where collaboration, commitment and dedication are fostered. ● Weekly Grade Meetings that provide teacher support through common core aligned curriculum planning, goal setting for teachers and students, shared assessment and the analysis of data... ● Distributed leadership structures which are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership and teachers play an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. ● Participate in The ADVANCE-Teacher Effectiveness Program to purposefully evaluate and adjust curricular and instructional practices in response to student learning needs and the expectations of the CCLS. ● Inquiry-Based Structured Professional Collaborations that will strengthen teacher instructional capacity resulting in school-wide instructional coherence and increased student achievement for all learners. ● School leaders and teacher peers support the development of teachers, including those new to the profession, with effective feedback and next steps from a strategic use of short, frequent cycles of classroom observation and student work/data. ● Feedback to teachers accurately captures strengths, challenges and next steps using research-based, common teaching framework that articulates clear expectations for teacher practice, supports teacher development and aligns with professional goals for teachers. ● School leaders have a strategic, transparent system for managing professional development and make informed decisions and develop succession plans(assignment, tenure, retention) about teachers, AP’s and other staff members that lead to improved student performance. School leaders consistently communicate high expectations (professionalism, instruction, communication and other elements of the school’s common teaching framework) to the entire staff and provide training and have created a culture of mutual accountability for those expectations 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The Teachers and administrative cabinet will continue to attend Instructional Lead team meetings, weekly grade meetings, and weekly Curriculum Professional Development sessions provided by various sources such as: Our District, DOE ELL Office, Teachers College Readers and Writers Project,GO MATH,READ Alliance, Reading Rescue, Lincoln Center, New Teacher Center Mentor PD sessions ,etc.. Monthly School Leadership Team meetings, monthly Parent Curriculum nights, and monthly Curriculum Professional Development sessions will continue to be available for Parents. All these collaborations, will allow us the opportunity to work collaboratively in order to effectively oversee and manage our school’s improvement plan. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 44  NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). In order to help support our students and families transition into our school community we provide our families with “Welcome to Pre-K” sessions, these sessions are given every spring. These sessions are designed to help parents understand how 3 and 4 year olds learn, what they learn in pre-k (pre-k common core learning standards), and how to support their children’s learning at home. We also provide information about pertinent programs and procedures to help ensure that families are well versed in navigating our school community as well as any items with the NYCDOE. All families receive a monthly newsletter besides our monthly school calendar, giving them important information for the month on all the events and themes for that particular month. Families are encouraged to participate in our various Professional Development sessions provided by our Parent Coordinator, Pre-K family worker, Instructional Coach and various Community Based Organizations that take place on a monthly basis. The Principal also provides “Java Mondays” each month, this is a time for parents to get together with the Principal and discuss school-wide programs and initiatives, as well as any issues or concerns that any parent may have. Families are also provided with various monthly family events that take place throughout the school year such as: Family Movie Night, Family Math Game Night, Literacy Day, Health and Wellness Fair, ESL / Rosetta Stone Computer classes and Trips to various city Museums. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At the beginning of every school year in September, 2018, a MOSOL committee is formed comprised of a cross-section of teachers representing all grades and subgroups. Through a unified consensus, we decided on the multiple assessment measures that will be used throughout the school year 2018-2019 to gauge student progress. In addition, during weekly grade-team and Inquiry team meetings, teachers will continue to analyze data and discuss observations about student work. Through an open-forum, teams will continue to make informative decisions regarding appropriate assessments and next steps for student progress along with the administrative cabinet. Subsequently, Professional development is provided regarding the use and results of these agreed upon assessments to improve school-wide instruction (Teachers College Reading and Writing project, GO MATH, Lincoln Center, Project READ, Fundations, Wilson, Estrellita, Fountas & Pinnell, Reading Rescue, I-Ready, Imagine learning, etc. 2018-19 CEP 45  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B,5C,5D and 5E NA 5A NA 5A,5B,5C,5D and 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 453,334.00 86,050.00 12,366.00 0 3,414,504.00 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 2018-19 CEP 46   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 161 - Juan Ponce De Leon, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 161-Juan Ponce De Leon school will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP 48  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;     Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 2018-19 CEP 49   holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand.  School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 161-Juan Ponce De Leon school School-Parent Compact (SPC)  P.S. 161-Juan Ponce De Leon school, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA);  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships  conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 2018-19 CEP 50     convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year;  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs;   monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 51  check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;    Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 52  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 65 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 5 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: This school year, 2018-2019, our intention is to utilize the Title III funds for an after school program that will begin in December, 2018 and end in March, 2019. The after school program will be operational twice a week for a total of twenty-two 1.5 hour sessions. Approximately seventy-five students in grades K to 5 will be invited to receive instruction on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Instruction will be delivered by 5 Bilingual/ENL teachers in the after school program. We will target newly arrived, holdover, potential holdover students that failed to demonstrate progress and at risk ELL students. Specifically, the subgroups targeted will be newcomers (0-3 years), ELLs with 4 to 6 years, Former ELLs (P1 and P2) and ELL/LEP students with an IEP (Individualized Education Plan). The teachers will provide supplementary instruction in English as a New Language (ENL) to ELL students in grades K-5. This year, instruction for students in grades K-5 will focus on empowering language learners to build English-language proficiency through a highly differentiated and rich instructional program called Language Power. Language Power is a rigorous program that targets instruction by addressing all four language domains. It provides listening and speaking opportunities in every lesson (labeled Talk Time), including structured support for speaking through sentence frames. It allows interaction with texts on a range of topics representing a variety of genres and content areas and provides regular opportunities to write about learning. Students are grouped according to language proficiency levels and grades. ELLs face a unique set of opportunities and challenges in meeting the Common Core State Standards. These standards require all students to develop literacy in the content areas. ELLs also bring other types of assets to their learning that constitute important resources for their success in the classroom, such as first-language knowledge and skills (Fránquiz & Reyes, 1998). These assets can play a part in the success of our students in order to be college and career ready. It will help them to learn and understand other perspectives and cultures. English learners benefit from a thematic approach to learning (Haas 2000). When students can connect learning to a larger context, it makes the information more meaningful (Haas 2000). Students are able to make connections and see how learning across the curriculum is interrelated. In language, a thematic approach allows English learners to be exposed to the content and academic language connected to the theme. Language Power provides students with, high-interest, level-appropriate text sets, all organized around common curriculum themes. Each book and text card is carefully selected to provide a natural progression in language and learning opportunities. With a thematic approach, English learners have an opportunity to use academic language across the curriculum, and experience the varied contexts in which to use language appropriately. They are asked to use language for similar academic functions, such as 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information description, explanation, compare and contrast, cause and effect, and analysis as they learn content from different disciplines. This gives English learners the chance to use the forms of language necessary to carry out the given task (function). This further provides opportunities for students to use general academic vocabulary to share their learning while developing new content-specific vocabulary, as well. Thematic instruction is an authentic approach to learning as it relates to the real world. Language Power lessons include a specific section for building background knowledge and vocabulary. This section is strategically placed before reading to help students make language and learning relevant and meaningful throughout the lesson. Language Power facilitates comprehensible input by giving students multiple opportunities to see, hear, and interact with vocabulary and language, and through the use of graphic organizers in the Student Guided Practice Book. The program facilitates comprehensible output by giving students opportunities to use language through speaking and writing activities, supported by sentence frames and opportunities for immediate feedback. Language Power provides students with appropriate support to ensure the successful transfer of language skills from guided practice to independent application. Each lesson follows the I Do, We Do, You Do model with the overall goal of promoting language proficiency Language Power is differentiated by design (via grade spans and language proficiency levels). Opportunities for differentiation are in each lesson. • a range of reading levels within each text set • activities in the Student Guided Practice Book, which can be completed with teacher support, in pairs, or independently • full-color books with photos and illustrations to support visual learners • graphic organizers to provide comprehensible input • sentence frames to scaffold the use of appropriately complex language structures • instructional activities that address multiple learning modalities • audio support via the Audio CD • flexible writing activities • activities to support fluency • Family Literacy Activities to enhance language development in the home We have taken into consideration that some of our ELLs have had limited or interrupted formal education, and that they may lack important academic skills and learning strategies, which are important to high achievement (Genesee, Lindholm-Leary, Saunders, & Christian, 2005). Given these challenges, program focuses on the literacy and language development of ELLs with targeted activities and strategies. The approach of building upon ELLs existing background knowledge and first language is central to the implementation of these programs. Given the above-mentioned challenges facing ELLs, Language Power will: • Capitalize on ELLs first language knowledge and skills • Provide essential scaffolding that can be adjusted for ELLs with different levels of English proficiency to help them overcome the challenges of meeting grade-level content and literacy standards in their second language • Maintain the complexity of the text, so that our ELL students get the full benefit of reading grade-level text • Build upon students’ language proficiency • Enhance relevant knowledge about literary concepts • Develop students’ reading and writing skills with the goal of helping students meet grade-level standards. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: It is our intention to provide a total of four hours of per session professional development during the Title III Program. On December 5, 2018, teachers will be provided with a 1 hour session of professional development focusing on an overview of Language Power. Teachers will have the opportunity to learn the components of the program and its structure. The ENL teachers, Ms. Santiago and Ms. Pimentel will provide and modeling Reading strategies that will enrich the learning environment for ELL students. Teachers will focus on ways they can support students through scaffold and differentiated content, process and product. On December 6th, 2018 another 1 hour professional development day will allow teachers to take a closer look at the curriculum and create a pacing calendar. This professional development will take place after the mandated professional development session required by all teachers. It will be a per session professional development which will allow a closer look at the program and its compartments. Student data will be reviewed and strategic groups will be created to promote language development success. The third day of professional development will take place on January 22, 2019 where teachers will evaluate and reassess the program. Teachers will reconvene and discuss ways to improve the delivery of the program. New strategies can be shared and placed for the duration of the program. The final professional development day will be on March 11, 2019. On this day teachers will evaluate the program and its effectiveness by looking at student data collected. A determination of the programs continuation will be made upon the results of the student data. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: This year, we will provide ENL classes for parents who wish to improve or gain skills in the English language. The teacher will incorporate the use of technology to enhance computer skills so that parents can become knowledgeable with the NYC Schools Account website, how to do research and create resumes. These classes will be on Wednesdays and Thursdays, from 2:30-4:00 pm during the months of January, 2019 through March, 2019. The service provider will be a Bilingual certified teacher that will use strategies that will accommodate the needs of our parents. Some of the proposed topics to be covered will include greetings, asking for directions, basic grammar, calling on the phone, shopping for clothes, telling the date, visiting the doctor, 2018-19 CEP 56  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities etc. The Language Power program empowers families to support their child’s language development through Family Literacy Activities for each lesson and Parent Tip Cards that offer useful tips and engaging activities to build parents’ capacity to support literacy and language learning in the home. The Digital Resource CD allows student to take home a printed and replicated copy of each lessons book or text card, as well as Spanish and English versions of the Family Literacy Activities. The rationale for these classes is due to the fact that we have many immigrant parents that have expressed the desire to learn English. Learning the English language will provide the vehicle for them to be able to fully participate in society including their active participation in their child's schoolwork. The ability to speak English results in good communication. When parents and teachers share information, children learn more and parents and teachers feel more supported. Good communication can help create positive feelings between teachers and parents. Parents benefit because they learn more about what goes on in school and can encourage learning at home. Most importantly, children benefit by improved communication because contact between home and school helps children learn and succeed. Please note that in order to inform the parents about these classes, letters, fliers ( in both languages) will be sent home with students, as well as our school-wide telephone messenger system will remind all families of these opportunities. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 70% = 9,373.00 Per Session rate with Fringes 1 Supervisor 4 Teachers= students 1 Secretary 1 Teacher = Parents Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. 10% = 1,339.00 Professional Development Consultant/Literacy Coach Teachers Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. 20% = 2,678.00 Language Power Materials Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4 Teachers will be assigned to work with students and 1 teacher will be assigned to work with Parents for 1.5 hours 2 times a week for 22 weeks 1 Supervisor will be assigned for 1.5 2 times a week for 22 weeks 1 Secretary will work for 1 hour for 11 weeks There will be 4 sessions of Professional Development for 1 hour per session for 5 teachers during the months of December, January and March Teacher resources-pencils notebooks, folders,etc. Student workbooks and Anchor text, Guided Reading books 2018-19 CEP 57  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 7 School Name Juan Ponce De Leon Borough Bronx School Number 161 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Eliamarie Soto Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Myra Santiago, Masiel Pimentel Teacher/Subject Area Giselle Quinones Teacher/Subject Area Kisy Garcia-Romero Related-Service Provider Maria Diaz Superintendent Richard Cintron Assistant Principal Ibis Lopez, Barbara Pinos Coach type here School Counselor Candice Oriero Parent Martha Guzman Parent Coordinator Denise Jourdan Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Guerrero, Olga Glenn Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 9 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 459 2018-19 CEP 59 Total number of ELLs 104 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.66%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 3 4 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 6 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers in grades K-5, use the English and Spanish translations of the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System which is a tool to identify the instructional and independent reading level of each student. It allows teachers to document student progress through one-on-one formative and summative assessments. As an instructional support in their native language, we use the Estrellitas and Palabras a Su Paso program which provides sequential, cumulative, structured, systematic, and differentiated direct instruction. The assessment components are used to monitor language arts literacy levels and unit assessments to assist teachers as they monitor progress in the Spanish language. Other programs that are used to guide instructional planning are Fundations, Teachers College Reading and Writing and Go Math (pre/post) assessments. Data collected from these assessments are used to formulate instructional groups and target individual student needs. The assessment focuses on specific skills that will allow the teacher to formulate reading groups and target specific skills. The data collected allows us to target specific students for our after school programs and AIS services. 2018-19 CEP 60  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? There is an assessment committee (MOSL) that carries out professional development sessions to ensure all testing is done properly. There is an assessment calendar that provides selected dates to ensure assessments are being administered at the beginning, middle and end of the year along with progress monitoring in between. Coverage is provided for the teachers to ensure they have the time to properly administer these assessments. Norming sessions are provided to assure norm scoring practices across students and teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Administrators, ENL , and inquiry teams hold ongoing instructional conferences with grade teams based on student work, formative and summative data, TC Writing on demand pieces and instructional practices/ENL strategies that evaluate effectiveness and necessary adjustments in our Dual Language program. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data collected is analyzed, students are grouped according to the skills they need most improvement on. Interventions throughout the day are provided during Frozen Time which is an allocated amount of time in the schools daily schedule where focus on specific skills are addressed. Instructional routine is based on differentiated instruction according to students reading/performance levels in addition, selected students participate in a 6-8 week cycle of Reading Rescue where students received intensive one on one intervention in phonemic awareness skills. Students who are at risk will also receive At Risk intervention with specialized providers such as SETTS as well. Students' NYSESLAT proficiency levels are also considered when developing an intervention plan. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Teachers will use screening and formative assessment data to identify students at risk. As students are identified teachers in collaboration with administrators, and ENL teacher will monitor and assess the effectiveness and fidelity of RTI /AIS intervention plans. Data-based decision making for instruction, movement within the multilevel will be made and action plans will be formulated. Students’ progress will be monitored in cycles of 6-8 weeks. Teachers will share strategies through collaborative team meetings, student work will be presented, analyzed and next steps are formed during grade-inquiry meetings. Consultants will provide support on differentiation, questioning and discussion techniques. After the 6-8 week cycles if student has not shown progress, instruction will be modified and differentiated to accommodate students specific needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT data states 11% of our ELL population increased from one proficiency level to another and only 3% were proficient. It also shows that 29% of our ELL's both remained at the same levels and decreased at least one proficiency level. NYSESLAT data indicates a patterns across performance levels which confirms the need to focus on Speaking and Writing Modalities for most of our ELL students across the grades. This data allows us to see the areas students are not performing well and guides us to make concrete decisions on a feasible approach. The ability to organize student groups according to proficiency levels has allowed for direct instruction in programs like Imagine Learning and Language Power. These two programs have targeted individual student needs and provide support in their native language as well. Additional information is obtained from NY ELA, Math and Science test to determine ELL students academic progress and need for intervention. Students decreased 7% in levels 2-4 in math and 23% in ELA. This data has directed us to target specific skills in reading and writing both in our daily school schedule and Title III after school program. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Findings from data collected are discussed in teacher teams. After carefully examining of our NYSESLAT results, we found that most of our students were greatly struggling with the Writing and Speaking modalities. These have been our focus areas and strategic adjustments teacher teams have made to our writing program. Our school has been using Teachers College Writers workshop emphasizing on response to literature using journal prompts and writing through the content areas. Question and 2018-19 CEP 61  Discussion techniques as well as Language Arts development strategies are incorporated daily to target the Speaking modality as well as the Writing. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The Freestanding ENL program is an Integrated and Stand Alone program that follows the mandated number of minutes allotted to each student by the results of the NYSESLAT as per CR Part 154.2 . ELL students that are considered Entering and Emerging are required 360 minutes a week of which 180 minutes are Stand Alone ENL and 180 are Integrated ENL. This totals 8x45 minute sessions. Those students who are Transitioning and Expanding warrant 180 minutes per week which total 4x45 minute sessions. Transitioning student mandated minutes are flexible in the two models of ENL instruction as long as a minimum of 90 minutes are in Integrated ENL. Expanding student mandated minutes are in Integrated ENL. Commanding students are now allocated 90 minutes a week which is 2x45 minute sessions for 2 years. Students are grouped according to proficiency levels in grade bands of K-2 and 3-5. An ENL program called Language Power, Building Language Proficiency is used to promote English proficiency through the content areas of Social Studies and Science. As a supplemental technology component, a program called Imagine Learning is used for more individual targeted instruction. This program supports students of many languages and develops an instructional plan according to the results of a diagnostic test. Another technology program used is Reading A-Z which provide an individual learning program for each child as they practice many reading skills at their pace. ENL Stand Alone groups are homogeneous and the Integrated groups are grouped heterogeneous. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. The Dual Language program follows the 50/50 model that ensures an equal amount of language instruction in English and Spanish. The Kindergarten, First and Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth grade teachers follow the alternating language of the day model and also provide content area instruction in both languages (English and Spanish) to our ELL's and EP's. Fifty percent of ELLS and EP-S are integrated in one language room to ensure collaboration between English dominant and Spanish English students. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our certified Dual Language and Bilingual Special Education classroom teachers as well as our English as a New Language teachers develop program cards indicating the mandated ENL, HLA and ELA instruction as specified in CR Part 154.2. The ELL students are provided the appropriate number of minutes in ENL, ELA and Home Language Arts Instruction as per NYSESLAT proficiency levels. Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes (8 periods) of ENL instruction per week. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes (4 periods) of ENL instruction and 180 minutes (4 periods) of ELA instruction per week. Home Language Arts is provided for more than the required 300 minutes to 450 minutes per week for Entering and Emerging students. Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding students also receive more than the required 225 minutes per week . 2018-19 CEP 62  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. With the implementation of our new Common Core Literacy (TC Reading and Writing Units) and (GO MATH) programs, our school has had to supplement various Spanish resources to accommodate our Dual Language Program. Due to the lack of Spanish resources, teachers continuously meet to collaborate with each other to identify resources that will help support each programs alignment with the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers of K-5th grade students, provide various scaffolding and ENL strategies to foster language development. The ELL students are provided the appropriate number of minutes in ENL, ELA and Home Language Arts instruction. Home Language Arts is provided for more than the required 300 minutes to 450 minutes per week for Entering and Emerging. Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding students also receive more than the required 225 minutes per week . The Dual Language program follows the 50/50 model that ensures an equal amount of language instruction in English and Spanish in all content areas. The kindergarten, first, second, third, fourth and fifth grade teachers follow the alternating language of the day model and also provide content area instruction in both languages (English and Spanish) to our ELL's and EP's. Content areas are supported with various native language materials like guided reading and anchor text. The ENL program uses a program titled Language Power which is a language development program that groups students according to their language proficiency . The content areas of Social Studies and Science support the vocabulary, reading and writing standards for English Language Learners. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students in the dual language classes are assessed with the ELE (Examen de Lectura en Español) the Spanish New York City Assessment. We evaluate their native language through a variety of elements. We take all of the following into consideration: teacher- student observations, dialogue, conferences with the students, students' standardized test scores, students' performance on teacher made tests, interim assessments, classroom assignments, portfolios, homework, and rubrics in order to ensure that our students are making adequate yearly progress in their native language. The Spanish version of the Fountas and Pinnell as well as a diagnostic and progress monitoring tool such as EasyCBM is used to assess students progress in their native language. We also use pre and post test in math to support direct instructional needs in Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students will be provided with academic intervention based on screening results. Their instruction will be tailored to their specific needs. Students with severed interrupted schooling receive intensive AIS. Academic Intervention programs include extended day, after school programs, and ELA/MATH academy. Students will utilize the Imagine Learning internet based program which provides targeted first-language support for English learners by translating key vocabulary words, customizing activities, and using a proprietary L1 fade technology. SIFE students will be be provided opportunities to strengthen the L1 and transfer skills to L2. Students will be encouraged to use their diverse experiences and express their knowledge through oral story telling, traditional cultural practices and beliefs. SIFE students will expand their vocabulary and knowledge through integrated activities and use of glossaries and cognate lists. b. Describe you plan for ELL's in US schools less than three years (newcomers). Additionally, because NCLB now requires ELA testing for ELL's after one year, specify your instructional plan for these ELL's. Students in the Dual Language classes who have less than 3 years (newcomers) are provided alternate day instruction in English and Spanish. Research has shown that students show more progress when the Native language is utilized for instruction and strengthening the native language accelerates English language acquisition. Appropriate ENL strategies such as TPR, visuals and realia are utilized to motivate and engage ELL newcomers. Students are encouraged through differentiated and scaffold instruction to expand on their background knowledge and experiences. They are also invited to attend our Title III after school program. c. Describe your plan for ELL's receiving service 4 to 6 years. Students who have completed 4 to 6 years are invited to our Title III After school Academy where they will receive additional 2018-19 CEP 63  instruction in English as A New Language, English Language Arts, and Native Language Instruction. At risk ELL's that have received 4 to 6 years of service are also provided with pull-out math and reading intervention by our intervention teachers based on levels demonstrated and changing needs of students. d. Describe your plan for long-term ELLs (completed 6+ years) At this time, although we do not have any Long-Term ELLs, we would mandate them to attend ELA/Math After school Academy. They would also be invited and encouraged to attend our Title III After school Academy where they would receive additional instruction in English as a New Language, English Language Arts, and Native Language Instruction. Long-term ELLs would be entitled to additional support by our pull-out writing and math academic intervention services during the day. e. Describe your plan for former ELLs (in years 1 and 2 after testing proficient) Our Former-ELL students will continue to receive ENL services of 90 minutes a week and testing accommodations for the next two year. As part of our ongoing support throughout, we will provide services such as: Academic Intervention programs which include AIS for Math, RTI, Title III After School Programs, and ELA/MATH Prep Academy. Students will utilize the Imagine Learning internet based program which provides targeted first-language support for English Language learners by translating key vocabulary words, customizing activities, and using a proprietary L1 fade technology. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs provide the following instructional strategies to scaffold and provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development: activation of prior knowledge, learning center activities, computer assisted technology, critical thinking skills, drama, extended day tutoring, flexible skill grouping, graphic organizers/thinking maps, hands on instruction, guided reading, integration of oral and written instruction, modification of text or curriculum oral strategies, questioning techniques, reading strategies, small group instruction, spelling strategies, test-taking strategies, TPR, tutor/peer buddy, use of visuals and writing strategies. Teachers of ELL-SWDs use supplemental leveled readers, Words Their Way is a hands-on, developmentally-driven approach to word study that illustrates how to integrate and teach children phonics, vocabulary, and spelling skills. These strategies are also utilized in native language instruction in the Dual Language program 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses the following instructional flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment: SETSS, ICT program, flexible skill grouping, task modifications, differentiated tools/tasks, technology programs, among others. Furthermore, to assure that our ELL-SWDs are placed in the appropriate program that promotes English proficiency and the achievement of IEP goals in the least restrictive environment, the child's ability to communicate and process information in his/her native language is assessed. Then the child's academic level and ability to learn is assessed by an evaluation multidisciplinary team. The results from the assessments determine the type of program that the child will be placed. Currently, we provide SETSS, ICT, Flexible schedule, and Self-Contain for our ELL-SWD. Students that demonstrate to be accelerated in a particular subject can participate in a mainstream classroom for that subject and in a smaller class for subjects that appear to be more challenging for the student. This assures that the child is progressing as he/she receives the support needed. In addition, ELL-SWD students receive the following accommodations for assessments as indicated in their IEP: separate location, double time, extended time,questions read, directions read, glossaries, test translations and scribing if applicable. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our AIS Math Teacher provides targeted instruction to those students that are either referred by the teacher or who scored proficiency levels 1 and 2 on the NY State Math test. In addition we offer Math RTI for 35 minutes per day. Our Reading Rescue program provides intervention to struggling readers with Fountas and Pinnell levels A-L. For approximately 35 minutes per day, our struggling ELL readers receive one to one reading instruction. Our ELA/Math Academy provides targeted instruction in English Language Arts and Math to ELL's in grades 3, 4 & 5. We provide a Title III After school Academy that targets all levels of English Language Proficiency levels of Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and 2018-19 CEP 64  Commanding. Imagine Learning is a source of technological intervention where native language support is provided in many languages while reinforcing English Language Development in grades K-5. Social Studies and Science Teachers provide scaffold instruction, differentiated materials and tasks to assure that ELL students are meeting the content and language objectives of the lesson. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, our RTI program will continue to provide our ELLs the extra assistance they need to acquire the English language during a daily 35 minute period in the morning. We will set high but reasonable learning expectations that provide ongoing instructional support to ensure that student success is met. In addition, the Reading Rescue program, an early one on one tutoring program will continue to primarily provide reading intervention to our struggling readers in grades K-2. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not anticipate any program or service changes at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. P.S. 161 provides all of our students including the ELL population an equal opportunity to participate in all school activities both during and after school. Parents are informed and invited via letters sent home in both English and Spanish. The school currently has a sports program called Asphalt Green, the ELA and Math Academy for our students in grades 3-5, Title III After school for all grades as well and a Reading intervention program to begin in December called Project Read for first grade students. In each of the programs we provide, student data is collected and reviewed to identify needs. Data includes formal and informal, state exams, baselines and benchmarks and teacher recommendations. Every student including ELL's are supported in the areas of need and are placed in the program that will address their weakness. They also participate in our swim program , basketball, track teams, soccer, art, and dance as well. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. As part of our ELL support, we incorporate an ENL program called Language Power that empowers language learners to build English-language proficiency with this highly differentiated and rich instructional resource. Each kit is separated by grade bands K-2, 3-5 and proficiency levels (Beginner, Intermediate and Advance). The content covers an array of social studies and science themes with a leveled range of books and provides rigorous instruction in the four language domains. Our Teachers College program along with supplemental Spanish leveled readers provides an intensive oral vocabulary instruction for children with limited vocabulary in Grades K through 5, to further support our English Language Learners in DL/ESL/Bilingual Special Education/Special Education classrooms. The FOSS Science program provides booklets and manipulative to provide hands-on experiences for our ELLs. We also have purchased a plethora of books and materials from the following companies in the past and teachers continue to utilize them in the Dual Language/Bilingual Special Education/ENL classroom: Lectorum, Benchmark Education, Flame, Rigby, Santillana, National Geographic, Bebop, Hampton Brown, Attanasio and Associates, Leap Frog Schoolhouse to supplement English and native language literacy instruction. Our school librarian will continue to place orders for Spanish books to expand our Spanish section in the library. We purchased Time content area kits in Spanish and English for the third, fourth and fifth grade dual language classes. Alfa-Rimas was also purchased in the past for the kindergarten Spanish dual language class and the first/second grade bilingual special education class. Imagine Learning is a technology software that focuses on basic vocabulary, academic language, and grammar. It is a key component of our ELL support. It provides targeted instruction for each student as it monitors strengths and weakness. Students are supported with language support and work at their own pace. We also purchased Spanish library books and English Picture Dictionaries from Book Source and Pearson Longman. And as mentioned previously, we will also provide support and motivate our students with the use of technology: computers in the classroom, iPods, flip cameras, and iPads. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the Dual Language program, Native language instruction in reading and in the content areas is provided on an alternating day basis. Native language books are provided as a support in the ENL classroom along with the support of a targeted ELL program Language Power that focuses on all four modalities. 2018-19 CEP 65  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. After screening, selected ELLs in Kdg.-5th grades will receive AIS in the areas of Reading, during the day three times per week for a 6-8 week cycle if the students require these services. Students in grades 3, 4, and 5 participate in an ELA/MATH after school program twice a week for ten to twelve weeks. Intervention is carefully tailored to student needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? As part of our ELL support, we incorporate an ENL program called Language Power that empowers language learners to build English-language proficiency with this highly differentiated and rich instructional resource. Each kit is seperated by grade bands K-2, 3-5 and proficiency levels (Begginer, Intermediate and Advance). The content covers an array of social studeis and science themes with a leveled range of books and provides rigorous instruction in the four language domains. Our Ready Gen program along with supplimental spanish leveled readers provides an intensive oral vocabulary instruction for children with limited vocabulary in Grades K through 5, to further support our English Language Learners in DL/ESL/Bilingual Special Education/Special Education classrooms. The FOSS Science program provides booklets and manipulative to provide hands-on experiences for our ELLs. We also have purchased a plethora of books and materials from the following companies in the past and teachers continue to utilize them in the Dual Language/Bilingual Special Education/ESL classroom: Lectorum, Benchmark Education, Flame, Rigby, Santillana, National Geographic, Bebop, Hampton Brown, Attanasio and Associates, Leap Frog Schoolhouse to supplement English and native language literacy instruction. Our school librarian will continue to place orders for Spanish books to expand our Spanish section in the library. We purchased Time content area kits in Spanish and English for the third, fourth and fifth grade dual language classes. Alfa-Rimas was also purchased in the past for the kindergarten Spanish dual language class and the first/second grade bilingual special education class. Imagine Learning is a technology software that focuses on basic vocabulary, academic language, and grammar. It is a key component of our ELL support. It provides targeted instruction for each student as it monitors strenghts and weakness. Students are supported with language support and work at their own pace. We also purchsed Spanish library books and English Picture Dictionaries from Book Source and Pearson Longman. And as mentioned previously, we will also provide support and motivate our students with the use of technology: computers in the classroom, iPods, flip cameras, and iPads. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). As a form of support to our new ELL's, resources in their native language of places to visit, support services in the community they can get some additional support from and educational resources that will assist in the transition of learning a new language will be provided as an ongoing trend throughout their stay at our school. School counselors will provide transitional service sessions that will help students who might be having difficulty adjusting as well as support for the family. An activity that new ELL's are provided with is to assign them a classroom buddy to assist them as they adjust to classroom routines and assignments. Clusters and out of classroom teachers provide a modified English curriculum and utilize the classroom buddy to assist him/her while in the cluster classroom. Parents are provided with information, community resources as well as informative workshops. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? This does not apply to our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 CEP 66  a. We have self-contained dual language classes in kindergarten, grades one, two,three, four and five. Fifty percent of the time is spent in the target language for ELLs and EPs in each grade. b. The core content is taught in English and Spanish. c. Language is taught on an alternating day basis. d. Both languages are taught simultaneously. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? This year professional development topics for ELL personnel are the following: Monitoring of students Understanding, Activities and Assignments-Rigor/Differentiation, Learning Modalities-Instructional Materials and resources for ELLs, Qualitty of questions and prompts, Discussion techniques for ELLs, and Student Participation. Professional development teams meet in cycles of six weeks. During the six week cycle, teachers research, implement, collect data, analyze, and reflect on the strategies and techniques learned about one of the topics mentioned above. Once teachers have concluded one cycle, they may start another six week cycle on a different topic. These topics aim to improve the teachers ability to teach ELLs in all subjects. We will target skills that will deepen the students understanding of questions and responses. The use of multiple entry points will also be an area of focus to be able to target ELLs, and SWD/ELLs. Our consultants provide sessions on unpacking the CCLS in Math and ELA. Teachers analyze the CCLS and how it is implemented in their lessons. They generate unit plans aligned to the CCLS in ELA, Math, and content areas. Teachers will attend professional development sessions provided by the Division of English Language Learners to become more aware of the new changes to CR part 154 and the Language Allocation Policy. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school Guidance Counselor arranges middle school visit tours that provide information to the students and parents about their prospective schools. These visits assist students and parents in selecting the school of their choice. Parents are provided a middle school workshop where information and assistance is provided in both languages. School personnel, administration and teachers also facilitate assistance to parents and students whenever questions arise about the application process or their prospective schools. ELL students that are making the transition from fifth grade to middle school will preview the middle school experience by either middle school representatives visiting our school or ELL student’s visits with their class and teacher to prospective middle schools. Students are exposed to special programs that are provided within the particular middle school. Parents are provided assistance in completing the middle school application in a timely manner at a workshop provided by school personnel or on a daily basis. The Guidance Counselors receive out of building Professional Development to keep them updated on any new protocols or changes in the system. They are provided with ways to ensure a seemless transition and are always available to provide assistance. Translation is provided for those parents who do not understand the English language by using our in house staff or the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Every Monday, the school provides Professional Development dedicated to enhance teacher pedagogy. Through discussions that target but are not limited to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Teachers within the school community attend workshops and turnkey the content they learned. Topics like the use of Technology, Differentiation, Scaffolding and teachers practices have been several topics addressed thus far. Furthermore, Dual Language teachers and Special Education Teacher receive one common preparation period per week to plan and discuss strategies and techniques specific to ELLs and SWDs . Agendas , handouts, and sign in sheets are collected at each professional 2018-19 CEP 67  development session/meeting and kept in the ELL PD binder by the PD team. Also teachers, will participate in various professional development sessions provided by the DOE ELLs program. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? On Tuesdays, time is allotted for teachers to meet with parents to discuss student progress and concerns. This would be the best time to schedule the annual individual meetings. Teachers will telephone parents and make arrangements to fit both their needs if this day will not work. Translation is provide either by a staff member or the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The school offers orientation meetings, ongoing support and educational programs for our parents. We provide ongoing Parent Orientation meetings for parents of ELLS as per CR part 154. We also facilitate workshops on a variety of topics from asthma to heart disease to how to prepare children for the state/city tests. A “get acquainted breakfast” and an Open House in the fall and spring provide parents the opportunity to meet other parents, school personnel and to obtain information regarding workshops and programs offered in our school. We offer computer classes for parents, so that our parents can further assist their children as well as further their own education along with ENL classes via the Rosetta Stone Program. School letters, fliers and calendars sent home are always written in both languages: English and Spanish. Translation is consistently provided at parent meetings, workshops and in the main office, as needed. The Principal also has Java Mondays, where parents are welcome to have a session where concerns, upcoming events and/or projects are discussed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Eliamarie Soto, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Juan Ponce De Leon School DBN: 07x161 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Eliamarie Soto Title Principal Ibis Lopez Assistant Principal Denise Jourdan Parent Coordinator Myra Santiago ENL/Bilingual Teacher Martha Guzman Parent Maisel Pimentel Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Candice Oriero School Counselor Richard Cintron Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07x161 School Name: Juan Ponce De Leon Superintendent: Rafael Alvarez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Myra Santiago ENL Coordinator YES Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Translation needs are discussed within the School Leadership Meetings and Parent Association Meetings to ensure that the school community is aware of the services available for translation. As Part of the HLIS intake process, families indicate the written and oral language of preference which is uploaded onto ATS. We use this as a reference when providing parents of different languages the same level of language support. Surveys are also used to help us assess our translation needs. The use of ATS reports like the RCPL and frequently updated Blue Emergency Cards will assist in determining parents preferred language. Teachers will be provided with their class list where they can update what the parent’s language of preference both oral and written is during conferences and Tuesday, Parent Outreach days. The Language Access resources like the multilingual Welcome poster, Language Identification Guide and Parents’ Guide to Language Access brochure are also used to help determine parent preferred language so that the proper language support is provided. Identification Tools are displayed in the Main Office to aid parents/guardians or any visitor who comes to the school indicate their spoken language and whether they require any interpretation services.. 2018-19 CEP 71  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish French Fulani Mandingo Arabic Bengali French Haitian-Creole Soninke Wolof 313 180 1 1 0 9 1 0 1 1 61.74% 35.5% .2% .2% 0% 1.78% .2% 0% .2% .2% 312 182 1 1 0 9 1 0 0 0 61.54% 35.9% .2% .2% 0% 1.78% .2% 0% 0% 0% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of Monthly Calendars Monthly -at the beginning of each month (Sept.2018-June,2019) translated documents to parents. School generated documents are sent out in the two primary languages (English and Spanish) representative of majority of our population. School staff, such as the school secretary, the assistant principals, principal, family worker, and teachers will partake in translating letters to be sent home. Each year we do an inventory of our staff spoken and written language. This is available and when necessary, the members of our school community will 2018-19 CEP 72  Parent Workshops/Trips/ Memos Weekly/As Scheduled PTA Meeting Notices Monthly School Events/ Assemblies- Award Ceremonies, Concerts, Special Shows, Fundraisers Monthly/Seasonal provide the necessary interpretation/translation for the parent. If no one is available to translate another language that is not Spanish, we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We also will communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE vendor to send an on-site interpreter. Each year we do an inventory of our staff spoken and written language. This is available and when necessary, the members of our school community will provide the necessary interpretation/translation for the parent. If no one is available to translate another language that is not Spanish, we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We also will communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE vendor to send an on-site interpreter. An inventory of in house languages both written and spoken are taken to help support our diversity of parents and families of different languages. These staff members are asked to help in translating key information distributed at the monthly parent development workshops and translating information during these meetings. If no one is available to translate another language that is not Spanish, we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We also will communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE vendor to send an on-site interpreter. An inventory of in house languages both written and spoken are taken to help support our diversity of parents and families of different languages. These staff members are asked to help in translating key information distributed throughout the year. If no one is available 2018-19 CEP 73  Family Curriculum Night Reminders Last Friday of the Month Newsletters/Parent Letters/Notices Weekly/Monthly After-school Permission Slips Fall/Spring to translate another language that is not Spanish, we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We also will communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE vendor to send an on-site interpreter. An inventory of in house languages both written and spoken are taken to help support our diversity of parents and families of different languages. These staff members are asked to help in translating key information distributed throughout the year. If no one is available to translate another language that is not Spanish, we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We also will communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE vendor to send an on-site interpreter. Teachers in need of translating letter will submit the parent letters to be reviewed and approved by administrators and then are passed on to one of the identified staff members that will translate the document. This process will take no more than forty eight hours. For the languages not spoken by staff members, the Intranet will be checked to see if a customizable template in the language(s) needed has been created. If no one is available to translate another language that is not Spanish, we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We also will communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE vendor to send an on-site interpreter. An inventory of in house languages both written and spoken are taken to help support our diversity of parents and families of different languages. These staff members are asked to help in translating key information distributed throughout the year. If no one is available 2018-19 CEP 74  Parent Conferences Reminders November, March, May, June to translate another language that is not Spanish, we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We also will communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE vendor to send an on-site interpreter. An inventory of in house languages both written and spoken are taken to help support our diversity of parents and families of different languages. These staff members are asked to help in translating key information distributed throughout the year and help in translating information during these meetings. If no one is available to translate another language that is not Spanish, we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We will also communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE vendor to send an on-site interpreter. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May provide interpretation service(s)? An inventory of our staff spoken and written language is available and when necessary, an available member of our school community will provide the necessary interpretation for the parent. If no one is available to translate another language that is not Spanish, we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We also will communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE 2018-19 CEP 75  Family Curriculum Nights Monthly ELL-SWD IEP Meetings As required per IEP regulations Individual parent meetings/Phone Calls from a teacher or Guidance Counselor/Attendance teacher Interactions on a daily basis vendor to send an on-site interpreter. An inventory of our staff spoken and written language is available and when necessary, an available member of our school community will provide the necessary interpretation for the parent. If no one is available to translate another language that is not Spanish, we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We also will communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE vendor to send an on-site interpreter. An inventory of our staff spoken and written language is available and when necessary, an available member of our school community will provide the necessary interpretation for the parent. If no one is available to translate another language that is not Spanish, we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We also will communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE vendor to send an on-site interpreter. An inventory of our staff spoken and written language is available and when necessary, an available member of our school community will provide the necessary interpretation for the parent. If no one is available to translate another language that is not Spanish, we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We also will communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE 2018-19 CEP 76  Parent Engagement Tuesdays September-June vendor to send an on-site interpreter. We will utilize our inventory of school-based personnel for interpretation when necessary. If no one is available to translate another language that is not Spanish, we will use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line, use DOE intranet templates and any translated documents in the languages available. We also will communicate with the Translation and Interpretation unit or hire a DOE vendor to send an on-site interpreter. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school has purchased a phone communication system called school messenger that translates according to the specific language needs from our surveys and they are: English, Spanish, French, Fulani, Mandingo, Arabic, and Bengali. As for the Spanish speaking families, in house staff is available to translate any concerns and emergencies. If a certified pedagogue is not available and/or does not speak the preferred language, the Bronx Field Support Center’s Over-The-Phone Interpretation line is used to communicate with Limited-English-proficient families. Each teacher will be given the 1-800 Language Line number which will allow them to access 200 plus languages so they can speak to all parents regardless of preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members will be provided with the overview of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 during our yearly Welcome Back PD for all staff members in September, 2018. They will be made aware of the available resources to ensure all families are kept well informed. The Language Access Coordinator (LAC) and ELL Coordinator will turnkey the information learned at the training provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit on how to use translation services and over-the-phone interpretation services. The Principal will make weekly announcements during Parent Engagement Tuesdays to remind all staff and parents about the translation services available both in house and in the DOE. Copies of the brochures, guides, and over the phone interpreter services will be distributed to all staff members and made available for parents. for future use. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 77  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Through the Parents’ Association, Parent Coordinator, and school staff members, translation information and interpretation services will be disseminated to any and all parents who require interpretation. During orientations and/or open houses, parents are informed of their rights to request a translator or get translated services in order to communicate effectively with any members of the Department. They are provided information in the language of preference that is indicated in their child's biographical. All school related postings will be available in the covered languages as per the regulations. The Parent Coordinator will assure that all information is displayed in its proper form and that parents are aware of their rights. The Parent Association and the Parent Coordinator assure the communication between school and home is timely and explicit. The school Counselors discuss with students key details of the Disciplinary Handbook and Parent/Student Contracts which are translated for parents to understand before they are sent home. Parents are provided with their Parents' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities to assure that they are aware of their rights. They are to sign the contract and return it to the classroom teacher. If there are any questions, students are encouraged to have their parents come in and seek clarification. Language and Translation Services material will be available at the Parent Coordinators room and the main office. Welcome posters indicating contact personnel are posted at the school entrance to inform parents of who can assist them if translation is needed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During information sessions and parent workshops, parents will be given a needs analysis survey that will give us a better understanding on how we can assist them. An exit slip describing the benefit's from a given parent work shop will also guide our focus of what they need. Creating a relationship with our parents where they feel welcome to express concerns and achievements. 2018-19 CEP 78 
