2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 08X182 P.S. 182 Principal: ANNE O'GRADY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 08X182 PS 182 320800010182 PK-Grade 5 601 Stickball Blvd. Bronx NY 10473 718-828-6607 Phone Number: 718-409-8152 Fax: Mary Oldak moldak@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 08 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Anne O’Grady Beth Wolff Jaime Rodriguez Mary Oldak Jaime Rodriguez n/a n/a n/a District Information Dr. Erika Tobia Superintendent: 650. Bronx, NY etobia@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-935-3783 Phone Number: 718-828-6239 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anne O'Grady Beth Wolff Jaime Rodriguez N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Maryann Cairo Nicole Cerfeda ChristalForti *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Denise Martinez Mary Oldak Vivian Cruz Kassandra Juarez Ruth Melo Elizabeth Monteavaro Tanisha Robinson Margarita Valdes Member/UFT Member/CSA Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission confirms our beliefs, “PS 182 believes that all children can learn and become productive citizens. We are committed to building self-esteem and confidence, developing critical and creative thinking, stimulating curiosity and imagination and instilling a love of learning. We set high expectations for all students and provide opportunities for enrichment in the arts. We plan to accomplish our goals by providing a nurturing, positive, safe and orderly 2018-19 CEP 9  environment and the educational resources and programs that will enable our children to become lifelong learners. Staff, parents and members of the school community will work together to accomplish these goals.” 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 182 is a Title I elementary school in the Soundview section of the Bronx serving students in Pre-kindergarten through Grade 5. Currently, there are approximately 900 students enrolled in the school. The school population is comprised of 27% Black, 62% Hispanic (all), 3% White, and 8% Asian students. The student body includes 7% English language learners and 21% students with special needs. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-18 was 91.1%. The school has many programs that support and enrich the instructional program; cultural celebrations, assembly programs, Citizen of the Month, Star Search Positive Behavior Reinforcement Program, Culture of the Month, Academic Intervention Services Day Program, Mount Vernon Hotel and Gardens Museum Program, Education through Music Program (ETM), ETM Grades 4-5 Select Chorus, ETM Grades 4-5 Orchestra Program, Winter and Spring Concerts, Inside Broadway Program, Johnny Mercer Foundation Residency, Studio in a School Program, Studio in a School Residencies, and Art show. The school utilizes outside consultants to provide support to teachers and classrooms in best practices in teaching English Language Arts and Mathematics. Assembly programs, trips, and inter class visits provide an opportunity for students and teachers to interact in a positive, enriching environment. PS 182 enjoys collaborations with several community-based organizations: Mount Vernon Hotel and Gardens Museum, Studio in a School, Education through Music, Inside Broadway, and the Johnny Mercer Foundation . These provide ongoing parent outreach, enrichment, counseling, medical services, and referrals to other support agencies and are vital partners. Technology is infused into all curricular areas. Students have access to computers, smart boards and document cameras. Students have multiple opportunities to use technology to demonstrate and support their learning. The school applied for and received a RESO A grant(2017) which allowed the school to update the technology in the classrooms with new Smartboards and laptops. The school continues to seek ways to incorporate the use of technology in all subjects. Teachers and students have access to web-based instructional materials and individualized and differentiated educational activities through various subscription services. In 2018-19, the school is joining a pilot to explore blended learning. PS 182 maintains a safe and orderly environment and a positive school climate, which provides an atmosphere conducive to learning. Upper elementary students are provided opportunities to develop leadership skills and responsibility through participation in the Fifth Grade Leadership Program. The Book of the Month program focuses on a monthly theme to support character development. Service Learning endeavors provide students with opportunities to contribute to the greater community. The school is partnering with the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene to implement the School Mental Health Consultant program. through this partnership, we will work to support students in overcoming barriers to academic achievement. The school’s Student Assessment Team, Response to Intervention Team and the Student Implementation Team tailor pupil personnel services and policies to meet the needs of our educational community. The teams promote parent involvement, create individual student intervention plans, implements attendance plans, and integrates school and community resources. 2018-19 CEP 10  The Professional Development Team plans effective professional learning opportunities for teachers. The team utilizes a collaborative approach to professional learning to strengthen teachers’ knowledge and to further develop and refine effective teaching practices. The school utilizes professional development companies to strengthen teachers' content knowledge and current practices in ELA and Mathematics. In addition , the school seeks opportunities for staff to participate in many city and district initiatives and training. We recognize that families and other community members are a vital part of all students’ academic and social success, and consider family involvement an essential ingredient for a successful educational program. The school provides parents with many opportunities to participate in their children’s education. Our continuing efforts focus on strengthening home-school relationships and increasing parent and community involvement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body includes 7 % English language learners and 21% students with special needs.The school recognizes the need to improve student progress in English Language Arts and Mathematics particularly in regards to subgroup populations, Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners These subgroups perform significantly below the data for the all students category. Thus the school faces the challenge of ensuring that teachers make more informed instructional decisions; document student progress for accountability purposes; communicate with families about students’ progress; and have high expectations for students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. On the 2016-17 Quality Review, the school received a rating of “Well Developed” in quality review indicators 1.2-Pedagogy; 3.4 High Expectations and 4.1 Observe Teachers. The school received a rating of proficient in all other quality review indicators: 1.1, 2.2, 1.4, 1.3, 3.1, 4.2 and 5.1. The area of celebration for the school was 1.2 Pedagogy and the area of focus was 1.4 Positive Learning Environment. The framework element scores for 2018 reflect an increase in each category. The school made the most progress in terms of building trust within the school community. Our school learning environment survey indicated that parents had an overwhelming favorable response to trust with the Principal and with the teachers. The schools score in this indicator was a 3.52 up from 2.35 in 2017. While the school increased its score in the area of Rigorous Instruction (School Quality Guide 2017-18), the school's key area for focus continues to be to improve instruction, strengthen rigor and improve critical thinking throughout the school community. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X182 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 879 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 16 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 47 41 31 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 80.3% % Reduced Lunch 6.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 65.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 21.46 2% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 43.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 89% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 106 100 31 91.8% 5.2% 19.6% 24.1% 6.6% 0.9% 6 3% 8.7 39.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A YSH NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. On the 2016-17 Quality Review, the school received a rating of “Well Developed” in quality review indicators 1.2-Pedagogy; 3.4 High Expectations and 4.1 Observe Teachers. The school received a rating of proficient in all other quality review indicators: 1.1, 2.2, 1.4, 1.3, 3.1, 4.2 and 5.1. The area of celebration was 1.2 Pedagogy whose impact was seen in the production of meaningful student work products that reflected a high level of participation and ownership. The school met the target in rigorous instruction on the 2016-17 School Quality Guide. 2. The NYS ELA Exam test results reflect that in 2018, 43.3% of students scored at a Level 3 or 4 . This demonstrates a significant increase of 10.9% from 32.4% (2017) . At the same time, the number of students performing at the lowest level decreased from 32.4% (2017) to 24.6% (2018). Students with disabilities demonstrated an increase of 11.7% with 14.9% scoring at proficiency (Level 3 and 4), from 3.2% (2017) and a 14.5% decrease in students scoring at Level 1 from 73.1% (2017) to 58.6% (2018). The ELL subgroup represented approximately 29 students in grades 3, 4 and 5 with only3.4 % or 1/29receiving a Level 3 or 4 . 58.6% of the students in this group scored at the lowest performance level of Level 1, a decrease of 14.5 from 2017. There is a continuing need to improve student performance in English Language Arts . The priority for the school is to provide a sequential, consistent and rigorous writing program that promotes close reading and citing text evidence as appropriate to defend one's claims and arguments. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 13  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all classroom teachers (K-5) will implement 4 rigorous Common Core Learning Standards aligned units of study in writing which will result in 75% of the students increasing at least 1 level as measured by the scores on the pre and post unit performance based assessment using the Writing Pathways unit specific rubric. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Key teachers on each grade will be identified to receive in classroom professional development in English Language Arts with American Reading Company Literacy Consultants (funding permitting). All teachers in Grades Kindergarten- Grade 2 will attend scheduled professional development in writing with the Universal Literacy Coach on scheduled Mondays. All teachers in Grades 3-5 will attend professional development in writing with Assistant Principals on scheduled Mondays. A writing period has been scheduled each day in all classrooms Kindergarten- Grade 5 to ensure that all students engage in writing each day. All classrooms will receive instruction in 4 units of writing- narrative, informational, opinion/persuasive and poetry).The Writing Workshop Model will be implemented (mini-lesson, guided writing, shared writing, independent writing) A morning English Language Arts program for English Language Learners and for Level 1 and 2 students (funding permitting) has been scheduled for students in grades 3-5 beginning in December. Eligible students (Levels 1 and 2), ELL's, SIFE, Immigrant students will receive supplementary ELA instruction for 50 minutes before the start of the school day 3X a week (7:20-8:15 a.m.) Key teachers and administrators will attend Teachers College Reading Institute July 16-20, 2018. and ongoing TC Writing Institute days for administrators provided by District 8. The information will be shared with the staff during professional development on scheduled Mondays 2:40 p.m.-4:00 p.m. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students including ELLs, STH and SWDs Sept 2018- June 2019(funding permitting) Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, American Reading Consultants (funding permitting) 1X per week Mondays All students including ELLs, STH and SWDs All students including ELLs, STH and SWDs Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals,Teachers, Universal Literacy Coach (Grades K-2) Dec. 2018- April 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers (funding permitting) Classroom and cluster teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Key Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will encourage parents to participate in planning monthly parent workshops provided through the Title I Parent Advisory Committee (October- June). Workshops will be held to provide opportunities for parents to assist their children at home in their academic studies. Workshops have been scheduled on the following topic: Balanced Literacy, 100 Book Challenge and the Writing Workshop. Workshops will include the citywide and district 2018-19 CEP 15  expectations and provide assistance to parents in understanding the Common Core Learning standards. Parent workshops are scheduled to accommodate a variety of parent schedules, in the morning, on Tuesday afternoons during the designated Parent Engagement time and morning or evening workshops. Classroom teachers invite parents to participate in class need/interest specific family workshops and classroom writing celebrations or publishing parties on Tuesdays from 2:40 p.m.-3:20 p.m. (September - June). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources: Teachers, administrators, data specialist, ULIT coach, a professional development committee comprised of 4 administrators and 6 teachers, Professional Learning Communities , ULIT Coach Grades K-2 (provided at discretion of NYC DOE), American Reading Consultant for a minimum of 10 days each@ $1500/day to provide job- embedded professional development and including workshops on Monday Professional Development time 2:40-4:00 p.m. ( funding permitting), Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of December 2018, 75% of the students on each grade will score in the scale score range of 2.0-3.0 or higher on the End of Unit assessment.as measured by the Writing Pathway rubrics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Writing Pathways Task and Rubric for Narrative Writing, Informational Writing and Opinion/Argument Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In 2017-18, on the school survey 90% of parents agree that their child is safe at school and 89% are satisfied with the education their child received. In 2017-18, 83% of teachers say that students are safe in hallways, bathrooms and the cafeteria. This continues to be an area for improvement. The school has a population of approximately 900 students in Prekindergarten- Grade 5. The school recognizes the need to provide positive reinforcement to promote appropriate behavior which will lead to higher student achievement and a safer environment for students. The school recognizes the need to provide guidance resources to parents to support school goals. The school anticipates offering parents these resources through our new partnership with the School Mental Health Consultant program and the school's guidance counselor. The school’s area of focus was in the area of the area of focus was 1.4 Positive Learning Environment. It was noted in the 2016-17 Quality Review that although the school culture is built on a structure that allows all students to be known by at least one adult, these structures are not necessarily personalized. The school supports student learning, family communication and provides professional development in these areas. However, it was stated that this does not always result in effective instructional and personal in behavior adjustments or strategically align with student need. This is an area of focus to ensure student outreach is personalized to meet the needs of the student and that professional development is better aligned to result in effective instructional adjustments and align with student need. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will implement a social and emotional intelligence program in all Pre-K to Grade 5 classrooms which will result in a decrease of 10% in Level 3 and 4 student infractions of the NYC Citywide Behavioral Expectations as compared to data from June 2018. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implement program for social emotional intelligence- Phase 2 integrating it into curriculum in all classrooms PreK to Grade 5. Every classroom will publicly display the expectations to achieve "STAR" recognition in the academic and social areas. Schedule monthly grade-level assemblies to recognize students STAR achievements. Students will be recognized for academic achievements in mathematics, reading and writing. Students will be recognized for social achievements though recognition of the Star citizens and Star Class on the grade. Each semester, a bulletin board will be created to recognize individuals with 100% attendance. Daily attendance will be displayed for classes. Schoolwide celebration of monthly character education/ emotional intelligence theme through the Book of the Month. Book of the Month Committee will select books with strong character education/ emotional intelligence themes. Bulletin board in main hallway will identify the trait/theme highlighted in the Book of the Month. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students including ELLs, STH and SWDs All students including ELLs, STH and SWDs Parents, All students including ELLs, STH and SWDs All students including ELLs, STH and SWDs Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, Grade Leaders, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, Grade Leaders, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, Grade Leaders, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, Grade Leaders, Teachers, Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are invited to attend assemblies each month to share in a celebration of academic and social successes. Family workshops will be provided by trained teachers and administrators which ground students and families in the Anchors of Emotional Intelligence during the Tuesday Family Engagement time. Parents will be referred to the School Mental Health Consultant program and/or Guidance Counselor/Social Worker on an as needed basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 18  Principal, Assistant Principals, Network 607 Director of Safety, Grade Leaders, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, School Aides, Attendance Teacher, Auditorium Schedule, 100 Book Challenge Incentives, Attendance Incentives, Star Class Incentives, Certificates of Achievement, OORS summary reports Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, the school will decrease the number of Level 3 student infractions of the NYC Citywide Behavioral Expectations by 10% as compared to data from March 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Summary Report (OORS system) for 2017-18 and 2018-19 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. PS 182 received a score of 3.64 for collaborative teachers on the 2017-18 School Quality Guide. This represents a gain of .26 from the 2017 School Quality Guide. On the 2016-17 Quality Review, the school received a rating of “Well Developed” in quality review indicators 1.2-Pedagogy; 3.4 High Expectations and 4.1 Observe Teachers. The school received a rating of proficient in all other quality review indicators: 1.1, 2.2, 1.4, 1.3, 3.1, 4.2 and 5.1. Quality Review Indicator 4.2 addresses whether teacher teams engage in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice. The 2016-17 Quality Review cited that teacher teams at PS 182 practices focused on improved learning and resulted in improved teacher practices and progress towards goals for students. 2.As measured by the Advance Teacher Observation System, Danielson indicators 3B Questioning and Discussion and 3C engaging students in learning continue to be areas of focus. The average score for teachers in Danielson rubric indicator 3b was 2.69 and for 3c was 2.65. This represents a continuing need to provide professional development related to critical thinking, rigor and high expectations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will participate in professional learning opportunities in best practices and the Danielson components/rubric to improve evaluations as measured by a 10% increase in effective ratings category for components 3b and 3c as compared to June 2018. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Schedule Professional Learning Workshops on Mondays from 2:40-4:00 p.m. which provide teachers with opportunities to investigate the elements of 3b and 3c; distinguish the difference in levels of performance; review examples of 3b and 3c indicators; and share strategies to improve levels of performance in 3b and 3c. Schedule professional development with the outside Educational Consultants(funding permitting) and/or the Universal Literacy (ULIT)Coach. Schedule in-classroom professional development with Literacy and/or Math Consultant or ULIT Coach(Grades K- Grade 2) for key teachers on the grade. Schedule differentiated professional development for Teachers in Gifted and Talented Classes . Schedule Professional Learning Opportunities through the citywide and district offerings which provides teachers with opportunities to investigate the cultural, linguistic and academic needs of English Language Learners. Topics will cover: analyzing NYSITELL data/NYSESLAT data ; building vocabulary for ELLs; tiered vocabulary, strategies to improve reading, writing, listening and speaking skills; close readings for comprehension & language development. Schedule Professional Learning Opportunities to build capacity in providing a school and classroom environment that supports learning for students with disabilities and other high need student subgroups by implementing the school's social-emotional intelligence training program. Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Sept 2018- June 2019 Mondays Principal, Assistant principals, Literacy Consultants/Coach 2:40-4:00 p.m. American Reading Company Literacy Consultants Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant principals, Literacy Consultants/Coach as available Schedule Professional Learning Opportunities to build capacity in providing a school and classroom environment that supports learning for students with disabilities and other high need student subgroups by implementing the school's social-emotional intelligence training program. Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Asst. Principals, Teachers 2018-19 CEP 21  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator, Administration, and Teachers disseminate information regarding school-wide curriculum and professional development initiatives at School Leadership Team meetings, Parent Association meetings , "Super Tuesdays" parent engagement activities and parent teacher conferences from September -June. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule, Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, PD Materials, surveys, per session and OTPS/Galaxy Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of teachers rated effective and highly effective in components 3b and 3c Administration will monitor the ADVANCE MOTP teacher detail report to compare teacher ratings in components 3b and 3c as compared to June 2018. This will help determine if school is on a course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE MOTP Teacher Detail Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1.On the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, the school received a "good" in the following categories: rigorous instruction, collaborative teachers, effective school leadership, strong family-community ties and trust. . 2.. The NYS ELA Exam test results reflect that in 2018, 43.3% of students scored at a Level 3 or 4 . This demonstrates a significant increase of 10.9% from 32.4% (2017) . At the same time, the number of students performing at the lowest level decreased from 32.4% (2017) to 24.6% (2018). Students with disabilities demonstrated an increase of 11.7% with 14.9% scoring at proficiency (Level 3 and 4), from 3.2% (2017) and a 14.5% decrease in students scoring at Level 1 from 73.1% (2017) to 58.6% (2018). The ELL subgroup represented approximately 29 students in grades 3, 4 and 5 with only3.4 % or 1/29receiving a Level 3 or 4 . 58.6% of the students in this group scored at the lowest performance level of Level 1, a decrease of 14.5 from 2017. There is a continuing need to improve student performance in English Language Arts . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of the staff will participate in leadership opportunities as measured by attendance/participation at leadership professional development, classroom visitations for the sharing of best practices, school committees and professional learning communities (PLCs). 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal will schedule meeting times for teams to ensure that school teams meet on a regular basis, i.e. School Leadership Team (SLT), School Implementation Team(SIT), Response to Intervention Team (RTI), School Safety Team (SST), Writing Curriculum Team (funding permitting), Professional Learning Committee (PLC) , Book of the Month (BOM)committee. A chairperson and secretary will be elected for each team. At least one administrator will serve on each team. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Content area teachers, ESL Teacher, SE Teachers, IEP Teacher, Technology Teacher Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Content area teachers, ESL Teacher, SE Teachers, IEP Teacher, Technology Teacher, SLT/SIT/RTI SST- monthly from Sept 2018- June 2019 PLC-3X before each cycle (6-8 week cycles) BOM January 2019- April 2019 weekly 2018-19 CEP 24  Principal and Assistant Principals will strategically prescribe and manage teachers' professional development needs determined through evaluative and non-evaluative classroom visits, staff surveys and professional conversations. Administrators will provide opportunities for key staff to attend professional development provided by Bronx Field Support Centers, District 8 and citywide training. Attendees will turnkey information to staff. ELL Teacher and SE Liaison will attend professional development provided by Bronx Field Support Center, District 8 and citywide training . Key teachers and administrators will receive job-embedded professional development through the American Reading Company literacy consultant, i-Ready consultant, Benchmark Education and/or NTN math consultant. Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Content area teachers, ESL Teacher, SE Teachers, IEP Teacher, Technology Teacher Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Content area teachers, ESL Teacher, SE Teachers, IEP Teacher, Technology Teacher As available Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Content area teachers, ESL Teacher, SE Teachers, IEP Teacher, Technology Teacher Sept 2018- June 2019 Scheduled periods on Monday or Tuesday Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Classroom teachers, ESL Teacher, SE Teachers, IEP Teacher, Technology Teacher Scheduled Tuesdays during professional activity time 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers and administration who serve on the School Leadership Team will assist in engaging parents in the ongoing development of the Comprehensive Education Plan goals, progress monitoring and review of school data as well as district and school parent involvement policies during the scheduled SLT meetings during the 2018-2019 school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. District 8 Superintendent, Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Substitute Teachers, related resource materials, Professional Development resources, schedule, schedule space Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 25  By the end of February 2019, at least 40% of teachers will have participated in leadership opportunities. School leaders and the Professional Learning Committee will review teacher surveys to determine the percent of teachers participating in leadership opportunities and the Advance MOTP Detail report to identify the percent of improvement in teachers' ratings in component 1e Designing coherent instruction and 3c: Engaging students in learning. This will help determine if school is on a course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets and agendas , ADVANCE MOTP Teacher Detail Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school received a score of 3.80 for strong family-community ties with the school survey reflecting an increase of 1.29 from the previous year. Additional opportunities should be incorporated to encourage parents to better understand the rigorous demands of the common core learning standards and to encourage better student attendance. The parent survey results (School survey 2017-2018) are overwhelmingly positive (88%). 2. The NYS ELA Exam test results reflect that in 2018, 43.3% of students scored at a Level 3 or 4 . This demonstrates a significant increase of 10.9% from 32.4% (2017) . At the same time, the number of students performing at the lowest level decreased from 32.4% (2017) to 24.6% (2018). Students with disabilities demonstrated an increase of 11.7% with 14.9% scoring at proficiency (Level 3 and 4), from 3.2% (2017) and a 14.5% decrease in students scoring at Level 1 from 73.1% (2017) to 58.6% (2018). The ELL subgroup represented approximately 29 students in grades 3, 4 and 5 with only 3.4 % or 1/29receiving a Level 3 or 4 . 58.6% of the students in this group scored at the lowest performance level of Level 1, a decrease of 14.5 from 2017. There is a continuing need to improve student performance in English Language Arts . The priority for the school is to provide a sequential, consistent and rigorous writing program that promotes close reading and citing text evidence as appropriate to defend one's claims and arguments. The NYS Math Exam test results reflect that in 2017, 39.3% of students scored at a Level 3 or 4, a 6.0% increase. At the same time, the number of students performing at the lowest level decreased from 37.2% (2017) to 33.5% (2016). Students with disabilities demonstrated a slight increase of 0.3% with only 5.7% scoring at proficiency (Level 3 and 4). Students with disabilities demonstrated a slight decrease of 1.7% of students scoring at the lowest proficiency (Level 1 ). The ELL subgroup represented approximately 35 students in grades 3, 4 and 5 with 8.6% scoring a Level 3 or 4, an increase of 0.5% . The ELL subgroup demonstrated a significant decrease of 10.1% in students scoring in the lowest proficiency level (Level 1). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 182 will provide a minimum of one opportunity per grade or subject per semester for parents to engage in grade specific academic and/or social emotional workshops resulting in a 3% increase in parents attending events as compared to 2017-18 as measured by attendance sheets. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 100 Book Challenge Parent Workshop- to inform parents of the importance of independent self-selected reading and how it correlates to standardized testing results and success in school Sept., Oct., Nov. 2018 Parents and students (Including ELL’s, SWD’s Expand the middle school choice workshop to include 4 th grade parents. The school will invite representatives from the various middle schools that the students attend. Flyers will be distributed to fifth grade students for all middle school choice fairs and open houses. Parents of students in Grades 4 and 5 November-December 2018 Teacher teams will develop one rigorous “Child-Parent Activity” session each semester for small groups or an academic workshop for parents. Dates will be identified and communicated to families. Sessions will be designed to support families in understanding their child’s grade-specific academic learning. All students PK- Grade 5 and parents October 2018- June 2019 Studio in a School Family Arts Engagement Workshops- a series of family workshops beginning in January in conjunction with our arts partner, Studio in a School (funding permitting) Families PreK- Grade 5 Jan. -May 2019 A series of parent workshops related to social-emotional intelligence . Families PreK- Grade 5 October 2018- June 2019 Title I Parent Committee, AIS Teachers, Classroom Teachers, Administrators, Literacy Coach, Parent Coordinator Middle School Liaison, Classroom Teachers, Administrators, Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, AIS Teachers, Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principal, studio artist, Studio paraprofessional, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Guidance Counselor, RULER Implementation Team, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Studio in a School, Education through Music, Johnny Mercer Foundation, Department of Mental Health and Hygiene, Inside Broadway, Center for Educational Innovation Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principals, Assistant Principals, Attendance Teachers, Guidance Counselor, IEP Teacher, Middle School Choice Liaison Teachers, AIS Teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will have offered at least one small group session/workshop on a topic of need or interest to the parents as measured by attendance sheets ,agendas and feedback forms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets and parent invitations. Parent feedback sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in Grades K-2 scoring at level 2 or below in ELA as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Eligible students in grades Kindergarten- Grade 2 receive Academic Intervention Services in small groups during the school day. Students are engaged in guided reading literacy activities. The small group literacy activities support the developmental program in the classroom. Kindergarten- Grade2 – an additionalteacher pushes in dailyto provide support/ instructionwhile the teacher alsoworks with small group reading- Selected students in selected classes in Grades 3-5 receive supplemental small group instruction in ELA with the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Intervention Program 3 X per week for 45 minutes. The mode Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day 2018-19 CEP 30  of instruction is small group. Students are engaged in literacy instruction with an emphasis on the guided reading component. Literacy activities will be aligned with classroom instruction and provide additional support to ‘at-risk’ students. The morning Mathematics and ELA program(funding permitting) is offered to students in Grades 3-5 on Monday through Friday from November through April from 7:20-8:15 a.m. Teachers will work with students in small group settings in ELA. Teachers will integrate conceptual understanding and the teaching of basic skills and develop test sophistication strategies. Grade 3-5 - scoring at or below Level 2 on the New York State ELA Test and students identified as Level 2 or below in ELA as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment. Small Group pull out & Small Group During the school day and Before school 2018-19 CEP 31  2018-19 CEP 32  Mathematics K-2 scoring level 2 or belowin mathematics as measured by the June 2018 End Of Year (EOY) Go Math assessment or teacher recommendation. Grades 3-5 - scoring at or below Level 2 on the New York State Mathematics Exam and students identified as Level 2 or below in Mathematics by the June 2018 EOY Go Small group During the school day Additional instructional time in mathematics for a minimum of 2 times per week for 45 minutes is scheduled. The classroom teacher in Kindergarten Grade 5 provides remediation/ enrichment activities for eligible students that support the program. Remediation/ enrichment instructional materials will be provided to reinforce identified areas of weakness. Selected students in Grades 3-5 receive supplemental small group instruction in with the classroom teacher. The morning Mathematics and ELA program (funding permitting)is offered to students in Grades 3-5 on Monday through Friday from January through April from 7:20-8:20 a.m. Teachers will work with students in small group settings. During the mathematics sessions, teachers 2018-19 CEP 33  Math assessment or teacher recommendation. will focus on mathematical skills and strategies and will provide students with an additional opportunity to develop mastery through practice. Teachers will provide exposures to new concepts and skills to foster mastery. Teachers will integrate conceptual understanding and the teaching of basic skill and develop test sophistication strategies. Small group Before School 2018-19 CEP 34  Science Students in Grades K- 4 - Teacher recommendation, unit tests, classroom performance, report cards Students in Grade 5scoring Level 2 or below on the 2017 Students requiring AIS in Science (Grades 4 and 5) receive differentiated instruction from the Science Instructional Specialist. Students are engaged in activities to support their understanding Small group/individual During the school day 2018-19 CEP 35  Grade 4 NYS Science Test of key concepts in science. Selected students receive supplemental small group reading instruction in Social Studies with either the Academic Intervention Support teacher or the classroom teacher. The mode of instruction is either in-class small group or pull-out small group. Students are engaged in activities to support them in understanding and responding to document based questions. Social Studies activities will be aligned with classroom instruction and provide additional support to ‘at-risk’ students. Social Studies Students in Grades K-5 - Teacher recommendation, unit tests, classroom performance, report cards Small group pull out During the school day 2018-19 CEP 36  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students identified as “at risk” by teacher, parent/guardian or Pupil Personnel Team Small group/ individuals During the school day Students are recommended for “at risk” guidance by the Child Study Team or on an as needed basis by the administration. Students are recommended for ERSSA counseling and “at risk” guidance counseling by the Child Study Team or on an as needed basis by the administration. The school nurse provides asthma classes for eligible 2018-19 CEP 37  2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Provide basic emergency supplies (school supplies, books, glasses), other educational services (counseling services, intervention programs, RTI, at risk resource room )as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All PS 182 teachers are highly qualified. Many teachers contact the Principal of PS 182, the Assistant Principal and staff members to obtain a teaching position. The Department of Education Personnel Office sends qualified teachers to the school. The hiring committee develops interview questions and scenarios specific to the position. Applicants are given a tour of the building by the Principal and Assistant Principal. Arrangements are made for the applicants to conduct a demonstration lesson. After the demonstration lesson, the applicant and the principal meet to discuss the commendation/recommendations for the lesson. A final interview is scheduled with the hiring team. Mentors are assigned to new teachers identified by the Mentoring Tracking System. mentors meet for a minimum of 2X per week with the teacher. the mentor provides job embedded professional development one period per week. Supervisors provide inter-visitation schedules for new teachers to view best practices. Principal and/or Assistant Principals meet periodically (3 times/year) with new teachers to provide support. Teachers are provided multiple opportunities to collaborate with colleagues in Professional Learning) on Mondays from 2:40-4:00 p.m. . Internal and external professional development opportunities are offered to staff as available through the city, district and Bronx Borough Support Center. Instructional consultants in English Language Arts and Mathematics (funding permitting) are hired to provide in classroom professional development. A literacy consultants (American Reading Company)) provide job-embedded professional development to key staff and professional development to groups of teachers on Mondays and Tuesdays. An NTN math consultant has been scheduled to provide job embedded professional development in the teaching of math. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 41  A school-wide annual professional development calendar based on staff and student needs was created to provide differentiated training and support to teachers, paraprofessionals and administrators. Key staff are identified to attend District training as applicable and scheduled on the District 8 annual professional development calendar. A school Professional Development Team was formed to identify topics of interest or need for study in Professional Learning Communities. Key Teachers were identified and encouraged to join the Professional Development Team. . The staff was surveyed and student and teacher achievement data reviewed to make informed decisions on developing topics for PLC study. Staff self-select and run the PLC. Staff share findings at the end of the cycle. A literacy consultant and a Universal Literacy coach (K-2) provide support in the classroom to identified teachers in best practices and in differentiating instruction for groups of students (funding permitting). These consultants also meet with the staff on Monday and Tuesday afternoons to provide professional development in Balanced Literacy. An NTN math consultant will provide support to identified teachers in best practices in mathematics and in differentiating for groups of students. Prekindergarten teachers receive monthly professional development in the classroom through both the NYC Explore Instructional Coach and the Early Childhood Instructional Coordinator. The Explore Coach provides support and professional development in implementing the Building Blocks program. An Assistant Principal attended the Building Blocks Mathematics Program 2017-18 professional development to better support the PreK teachers. The Principal and an AP will attend the Teachers College Professional development in Literacy in June 2018. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The professional development activities of preschool and kindergarten teachers are coordinated to align prekindergarten and kindergarten curricula and goals. Prekindergarten parents are invited to all parent workshops. Kindergarten and prekindergarten teachers visit each other’s classrooms. Prekindergarten teachers provide the future 2018-19 CEP 42  kindergarten teacher with children’s portfolios of their learning during preschool. Teachers share information in cases where a child may need extra support in order to experience success in school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. In addition to state assessment results, current and ongoing assessment data that describe student achievement is needed. Teachers utilize assessments, such as observation, running records, performance assessments and end-of-unit tests. Professional Learning provides teachers with opportunities that increase their understanding of the appropriate uses of multiple assessment measures and how to use assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers analyze Fountas and Pinell results and Measures of Student learning to enable teachers to identify objectives to enhance student performance. Teachers analyze i-Ready ELA and Math (Grades 2-5) scores and monitor progress towards meeting predicted target scores. Teachers create a grade-wide assessment calendar for English Language Arts and Math. Common Assessments in ELA and Math are administered and the results are analyzed. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 711617 123,967 12366 6895 4,312,896 X X X X X 2018-19 CEP 43 Column B Section Reference(s) 4A, 4B, 5A, 5B, 6 4A, 4B, 5A, 5B, 6 6 4A 4A, 4B, 5A, 5B, 6  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2018-19 CEP 44  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. PS 182 Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 182, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. PS 182 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 47  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. PS 182 School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 182, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 48  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30th of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● ensure that my child reads 2 15-minute "steps" each day ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 51 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: On the 2018 NYS ELA test, 3.4% of the 29 ELL students scored at Level 3. Currently, there are 10 Grade 3 ELL students- 2 entering,4 transitioning,4 expanding and 1 commanding student who still receive services. In Grade 4 there are 14 ELL students - 1 entering, 4 transitioning, 9 expanding and 3 commanding students who still receive services. In Grade 5, there are 10 ELL students- 2 entering, 1 emerging, 1 transitioning, 6 expanding and 3 commanding students who still receive services. Crucial to ELL students’ academic success in math is access to teaching that reflects the CCLS's emphasis on communicating mathematical reasoning to deepen content knowledge. Important to the academic achievement of ELLs in literacy is scaffolded literacy instruction which reflects the CCLS, vocabulary development and writing. , 9 expanding, The Title III budget will be used to support supplementary small group instruction in reading in the content area in Grades 3-5 including former ELL students who received a score of commanding in a before school reading program. Grade 3-5 ELL students will be invited to participate in the 5 days a week (M-F), morning reading program. Students receive an hour of small group supplemental reading instruction each day from 7:15 a.m.- 8:15 a.m. There will be 3 classes formed by language ability as measured by the NYSESLAT/ITEL . A supervisor will be assigned to supervise instruction. The teacher will conduct strategy lessons, acquisition of academic vocabulary and skill lessons based on the student's needs in ELA . The ESL teacher will service the entering/emerging level students in grades 3-5 during the morning program. The program is projected to run for 14 weeks for 54 sessions from January 28- April 18, 2019. Language Power Replacement materials from Teacher Created Materials will be purchased for each class at approximately $499.00/kit. The cost of the materials will be supplemented with the Title I OTPS budget. Program notification will be distributed in the student's home language as applicable using the Adult Preferred Language Report. Notification documents and permission forms will be sent to translations@schools.nyc.gov by November 1, 2018 for translation. Attendance will be taken daily. Parent outreach calls will be made as needed in Spanish by a staff member and through the Translation Office "over the phone translation" for other languages. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider 2018-19 CEP 53  Part C: Professional Development The professional development is at no charge to Title III. All staff receives ongoing professional development in the implementation of the Balanced Literacy model including the use of ESL methodologies and strategies .Through the American Reading Company , a literacy consultant (funding permitting) will scheduled to provide job embedded professional development to key teachers including classroom teachers with ELL students. The consultants also provide professional development on select Mondays in Reading. American Reading Company is a national provider of professional learning services that combines deep instructional job-embedded expertise, innovative technology tools, and a targeted digital content library that ensures sustained professional growth and improved student learning. The licensed ESLteacher will work with the teachers to enhance their understanding of language acquisition and focusing on the needs of ELL students. The ESL teacher will receive on-going training and professional development at scheduled meetings as available through Bronx Borough Field Support Office, District 8 Office and Fordham University. The Assistant Principals will attend compliance training provided by the Field Support Office and District 8. Professional development in the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching has been scheduled starting in September 2018 and continuing through June 2018 during professional development days, Professional Development will include Incorporating Discussion and Depth of Knowledge Questioning, Guided Reading, Writer's Workshop, Developing High Quality Science Lessons, Using Assessment to Drive Instruction, Enriching Gifted Students, ESL Methodology and Instructional strategies, Social-Emotional professional development, De-escalation and Managing Student Behavior. Classroom teachers, Content Area teachers, Academic Intervention teachers, the ESL teacher, Test Coordinator, Principal and Assistant Principals are scheduled to attend. Professional development is provided by the district to select teachers who attend the ongoing district level training in effective teaching, teaching guided reading to ELL students and content area seminars. These staff members turnkey the training to staff at professional meetings. “Respect for All Training” has been scheduled for November 5, 2018. The Guidance Counselor will provide professional development on this topic to all staff. Agendas are distributed for all professional development meetings. Teachers are required to sign in on attendance sheet. Copies are maintained in the office file. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 2018-19 CEP 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: These programs are at no charge to Title III. The Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) is generated to determine the oral and written translation needs of the parents. Parents are notified of all opportunities through written notification. Staff members (Assistant Principal, Supervising School Aide, and Parent Coordinator) at P.S. 182 will provide Spanish translation and outreach to make parents aware and involved in the child/ren education at: • Parent Meetings • Assembly Programs • Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March and May • Parent/Teacher meetings- individual as needed • Parent Workshops- monthly • Principal/Parent Meetings- individual as needed Parent Workshop topics and schedule: October - Annual Title I Meeting October - Town Hall Safety Meeting October 100 Book Challenge November - Middle School Choice December - Navigating Middle School- January - June (Schedule TBD) The ESL Teacher will schedule and implement meaningful workshops or parent/child activities on Tuesday Parent Engagement time. . Workshops through Learning through the Expanded Arts Organization and the Center for Educational Innovation (CEI) as scheduled by Title I Committee: LEAP programs are proven to enhance student achievement by providing individualized tutoring and assistance to schools and increasing parents’ ability to foster their children’s education. CEI-the organization's mission is to guarantee a quality education to NYC students. CEI Leadership believes that the school should be the center and driving force of public education innovation and reform. By design, CEI works directly with teachers, school leaders, and the community to create the schools their children need to succeed by: · · · social and cultural experiences of public school students · education policies · communit Topics to include: Developing Your Young Reader Help Your Child Prepare for the New York State Tests Understanding the Common Core Learning Standards Multiplication and Division Narrative Procedure Informative Wriing Opinion/Argument Writing Balanced Literacy Independent Reading Social Emotional Learning Developing and supporting existing public schools Training teachers and principals in effective educational practices Helping implement enrichment programs to increase academic skills and augment the Advocating for system-wide adoption of effective school-based reforms and public Providing extensive information services for parents and other interested members of the 2018-19 CEP 55  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities The Title I Committee surveys the parents to determine interests and needs. These surveys along with student achievement and attendance data are used to determine topics for parent workshops.Invitations are distributed to students to backpack home. Agendas are distributed at all parent workshops. Invitations and agendas are sent to the Translation Unit. Translated documents are distributes using the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL). Parents are asked to sign in on an attendance sheet. Copies are maintained in the office file of all documents. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Per session Per diem $9882= 3 teachersX 1.0 hourX 54 days X $61 $5460= 1 supervisor @ 1/day X 5 days X 56 days X 1.5 hours $1701.00= 1 school aide 1 1/2 hours X 5days X21 (attendance and parent outreach) Payroll secretary $481 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. The ESL teacher will provide ESL services to entering level students in grades 3, 4,and 5 for 1 hour before school 5X per week for approximately 14 weeks . Two (2) classroom teachers will provide supplementary reading support for 1 hour 5X per week for approximately 14 weeks. 2018-19 CEP 56 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. American Reading Company Literacy Consultants= $1500 per day not charged to Title III Instructional supplies ie Paper, Markers, Pencils, 3 Teacher Created Materials "Language Power" guided Reading program/Kitor replacement materials @ approximately $1200 N/A N/A N/A Morning Proram Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0.00 $1236 0.00 0.00 0.0 $18760 2018-19 CEP 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name PS 182 Borough Bronx School Number 182 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anne O'Grady Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maria Galifi Teacher/Subject Area Wendaline MercadoGrade 3 Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider Jennifer Lopez/ SETSS Superintendent Karen Ames Assistant Principal M.Vargas, M.Oldak, G. Schorr Coach NA School Counselor Barbara Skokos Parent Jamie Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Betty Williams Field Support Center Staff Member Kristy Delacruz Other (Name and Title) Sabrina Cruz/Sr ELL Compliance C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 58  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 824 Total number of ELLs 59 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.16% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 0 3 0 2 0 4 0 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school administers the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment to determine students’ independent and instructional levels. The reading inventory provides teachers with the information needed to assess students’ weaknesses and strengths in reading and to inform their instruction. This inventory is administered 3 times each year. In addition, the classroom teacher and the ESL Teacher employ informal running records, open-ended questions, student to student discussion, think-alouds and monitor student engagement to guide their instructional planning. Additionally, classroom teachers and the ESL teacher review assessment data from Go Math! Chapter and Benchmark assessments and writing pre and post assessments to determine growth made by ESL students, instructional next steps and how this data compares to other subgroups. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 59  Fountas and Pinnell data is collected and reviewed by teachers and administrators. The data is looked at collectively to get an overview of the class, by sub group and by individual student to form groups and track progress. Miscues are analyzed to determine next steps and instructional gaps. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? ELL Periodic Assessments Grades 3-5; NYC ELA Performance Task Kindergarten- Grade 5 (BOY and EOY), Go Math! Benchmark Assessment (BOY, MOY, EOY), Writing Pathways Pre and Post Assessments for narrative opinion/argument and informational writing. Historically, writing has been identified as an area of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Data is collected on a student profile sheet and analyzed. Administrators meet with stakeholders to review the data to determine areas of growth and ongoing need. Intervention groups are reformed to meet student need. Teachers meet on select Tuesdays to review data from pre assessments to prioritize areas for instruction and meet again to look at results from post assessments to determine impact of the instructional decisions and areas for continued focus and to ensure that teachers are implementing a strong multi-tiered instructional model that is culturally and linguistically responsive to the students' needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school employs data-based decision making for instruction, movement within the multilevel RtI system, and disability identification. Data is used to make educational decisions about changes in instruction, grouping and/or services. Students are provided with targeted instruction designed to match their learning needs as demonstrated on periodically administered assessments. English Language Learners who score below specified levels of performance on assessments are monitored to determine if additional support services are needed such as small group RtI in classroom (Tier 1) or in a pull out group with an AIS Teacher/ at risk SETSS teacher (Tier 2). In addition to classroom performance and assessment data, the school also takes into consideration evidence such as number of years of instruction in an ENL program, English and home literacy, content area teacher recommendations, attendance and a bilingual educational evaluation if the student has been referred for a special education evaluation. Teachers evaluate the success of the interventions by monitoring student progress through formative and summative assessments to determine if additional or more intensive interventions are needed. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, NYS ELA, NYS Mathematics data is analyzed through EDAT, using the RMSR, RLAT, RESI reports from ATS.The ELL Data Analysis Tool reflects 7 students advanced 1 level on the NYSESLAT, 1 advanced 2 levels, 9 remained at the same proficiency level and 6 regressed 1 level.Speaking appears to be a relative strength while writing continues to be an area of need. Two ELL students (2/27) scored in the proficient range on the NYS ELA Test. This reflects a 7% positive change over the previous 2 years. Three ELL student (3/37) scored at or above proficiency). This is an 8.1 % positive change over 2016 data. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ELL Data Analysis tool is used to identify strengths, weaknesses and risk level of students. This data is disseminated to teachers including the ESL Teacher and is used to group students for interventions and instruction. The data is used to place students in the appropriate classroom setting, AIS group and before school academic intervention program. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 60  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 182 delivers instruction to ELL students through a Freestanding English as a New Language program. The program emphasizes English language acquisition by providing instruction in English with home language support. As per CR Part 154, the school has adopted a combination of both stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL to serve the ELL population. Stand-alone ENL is implemented in a small group setting. For stand-alone ENL, the groups consist of students at the entering and emerging proficiency levels with a maximum grade span of two contiguous grades. Integrated ENL is delivered through a co-teaching model by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher. The integrated method includes content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. The grouping for integrated ENL instruction consists of mixed proficiency levels in one grade. b. TBE program. If applicable. P.S. 182 does not currently have a Transitional Bilingual Program c. DL program. If applicable. P.S. 182 does not currently have a Dual Language Program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students at the entering and emerging levels receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instructional time (180 minutes of stand alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL). Students at the transitioning and expanding levels of proficiency receive 180 minutes per week of ENL instructional time via the integrated ENL model. Former ELLs continue to receive services (90 minutes per week of integrated ENL) for an additional two years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher, classroom teachers, and reading specialists collaboratively discuss needs associated with second language acquisition. They discuss effective instructional strategies and develop different key domains of literacy to support competencies in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. The CCLS based instruction promotes language development. Our science program consists of a blended program which includes a hands on inquiry approach. ELL students participate in both art and music classes. All students receive instruction in technology and related language acquisition software is available for ELL students. In the content area subjects, the aim is to build on the individual student's prior knowledge and to develop abstract concepts through concrete applications using manipulatives, charts, graphic representations, text re-representation, pictures and realia. The ENL teacher integrates content areas such as Science and Social Studies through text selection and shared language experience approach. The teacher differentiates instruction by adjusting the academic language demands of the lesson in the following ways: frontloading vocabulary, modifying speech rate and tone, direct instruction of grammar, repeating key words and phrases, using context clues, modeling strategies, and relating instruction to students' background knowledge and experiences. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The school provides math and science exams in the native language of the students as available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 2018-19 CEP 61  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are provided with an academic intervention plan according to their linguistic and academic needs. b. Newcomer ELLs receive differentiated instruction during the literacy block as well as support with vocabulary acquisition and structures of the English Language during the stand alone ENL sessions. The students receive focused, intensive small-group interventions for English Language Learners determined to be at-risk during the school day and through AIS. The interventions will include the five core reading elements (phonological awareness, phonics, reading fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension). Explicit and direct instruction is the primary means of instructional delivery. The students are assessed using multiple measures including ELL periodic assessments, informal reading inventories, and Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments. The data is analyzed to determine instructional focus. The ENL teacher uses a variety of strategies to make information comprehensible for students at the pre-production and early production stages of second language acquisition including total physical response, the use of visual aides, realia and manipulatives. c. The ENL teacher differentiates for developing ELLs by providing comprehensible input when introducing new vocabulary and gradually increasing the level of difficulty, integrating language and content, and planning lessons which provide students with opportunities to develop language fluency and demonstrate their second language productive skills. d. We currently have one long term ELL student requiring ENL services after 6 years of service.However, if we had we would provide as needed academic intervention services and/or tutoring in addition to the mandated ENL services. e. Former ELLs who have been identified as English Language Learners and subsequently exited from ELL status receive 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL and specified testing accommodations. The ENL teacher differentiates for these students by integrating language and content, providing opportunities to develop fluency, and building academic vocabulary. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL students with IEPs receive guided reading in a small group setting at their individual reading instructional level and shared reading at grade level with supports. The classroom teacher has sets of guided reading books readily available at all levels that include nonfiction texts in the areas of science and social studies. These materials are supplemented by ESL Teacher with Mondo Publishing guided reading sets and Rigby On Our Way to English guided reading sets. ELLs identified as having special needs receive mandated services through the special services instructor and ENL services by a licensed ESL teacher. ELLs identified as having special needs will receive mandated services as indicated on their IEP. IEP goals and formal and informal assessments will determine focus of individualized instruction. Supplemental services will be offered to eligible students to support language acquisition. ELLs with special needs are entitled to accommodations on standardized tests as indicated on the IEP and additional accommodations offered to ELL students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher includes the special education students with the general education ENL groups and provides all the educational scaffolds to support them with attaining academic success. Teachers scaffold academic language and complex content to support students' participation in content areas as follows: 1. Language functions and structures are taught within the context of the lesson 2. Teachers use scaffolds such as visuals, Total Physical Response, and realia to support students' understanding of the main academic content 3. Teachers use a wide range of print, visual, and digital resources designed for developing English proficiency 4. Teachers model the use of language in ways in which students are expected to participate 5. Teachers use stories that are based on the students' culture that will connect to students' prior experience 6. Students participate in activities that promote academic discourse and accountable talk 7. Students are enrolled in an interactive vocabulary and phonics software program which promotes language and vocabulary acquisition 2018-19 CEP 62  8. Differentiation of products Additionally the ENL teacher works with the IEP teacher to include language acquisition goals in the students' Present Levels of Performance Goals on the IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELL students identified at risk receive the following academic intervention services (AIS): 1. Individualized instruction based on specific needs 2. Small group instruction in math using Go Math! reteach and intervention materials 3. Small group instruction in reading using fiction and nonfiction texts that includes science and social studies content 4. Supplemental small group literacy instruction provided by AIS/Classroom teacher (levelled readers, Fundations) 5. Before school language acquisition program (Language Power) for identified ELL students in Grades 3-5 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Parent coordinator will conduct outreach to parents of ELL students to increase participation in the morning program. Funding permitting, the Language Power program will be implemented earlier in the year with October as the target. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students participate in all school programs including art and music provided by Arts partners Education through Music including the after school Grade 4-5 Orchestra program and may audition for the after school select chorus.. ELL students in Grades 3-5 are invited to participate in a supplemental morning English Language Arts and Math program (funding permitting). The morning program begins in November and ends May 31st. The program meets 5 times week from 7:15 a.m.-8:15 a.m. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students use the Benchmark Universe, Newsomatic and Imagine Learning programs on the computer to support them with building reading comprehension, phonics, fluency, and vocabulary acquisition. In addition, the following instructional strategies are implemented to help English Language Learners acquire vocabulary: 1. Learning vocabulary in the context of mastering new concepts through literature discussions. 2. Student conversations 3. Writing exercises 4. Cooperative group activities 5. Semantic maps 6. Students are provided with opportunities to speak and use language that is linked to academic learning including paraphrasing, asking questions, and expressing ideas. 7. Supports such as graphic organizers, concept and story maps, word banks and word walls are used to enable students to process, reflect on, and organize information 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students are provided with glossaries, word for word dictionaries and cognates when appropriate. Students are encouraged to turn and talk in their native language to discuss more complex themes and texts when appropriate. As applicable, students may be partnered with peers who share a common home language. 2018-19 CEP 63  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ENL groups are formed considering the age and grade level of each student. The maximum grade span for grouping is two contiguous grades. We strive to form groups that address their English proficiency needs by using the ELL data analysis tool. We use resources that are developmentally appropriate and address the Common Core Learning Standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There are no programs before the beginning of the school year. The program in place includes and provides instruction to newcomers as per their academic and language needs. As new ELL students enroll, parents and children are introduced to the ESL teacher and the parent coordinator. Parents are invited to view the classroom and given a tour of the school building. As needed, the school uses the various translation services. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? P.S. 182 does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In order to comply with the CR Part 80 Mandate, professional development in meeting the needs of ELL students will be scheduled during grade level conferences, faculty conferences, and designated professional development days. All teachers at P.S. 182 receive professional development that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers is dedicated to language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching, and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. Teachers receive professional development in balanced literacy, guided reading, point of entry and incorporating supports into lessons and providing standards based instruction. The ENL teacher receives a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners and supporting ELL's with the NYS Learning Standards. The Literacy Specialist provides mentoring to the ESL teacher in the following areas: promoting a literacy-rich school environment; developing foundational skills in English; best practices in guided reading and shared reading, providing opportunities for classroom discussion and interaction to enable ELL's to develop their oral language; providing ongoing assessment and feedback to guide learning; and providing ELL's with models and supports. 2018-19 CEP 64  The ENL teacher receives professional development at on-going training at district and borough level meetings. In addition, the ENL teacher attends compliance professional development meetings provided by the New York City Department of Education. The ENL teacher attends network forums that address support for ELL's as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher turn-keys the information to the staff at P.S. 182. Non-pedagogic staff have received professional development in language access. The "I speak" cards are readily available and all office staff have telephone access to the translation unit. School aides receive yearly professional development in cultural differences. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Mondays from 2:40- 4:00 p.m. are designated for professional development. Approximately 5 of the days (5/30) will be used to provide ELL specific professional development for all teachers. The ENL teacher distributes agendas and sign in sheets for professional development activities and stores copies of these items in the ENL Compliance binder. The ENL teacher will participate in District and Borough level professional development offerings as available . In addition to working with the Literacy Specialist in ELA best practices, the ENL teacher will use resources and videos available through WeTeachNYC and the ELL resources available on the NYCDOE intranet. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher will reach out to parents to set up individual meetings at least twice a year (Fall and Spring), in addition to parent-teacher conferences and initial parent orientations. These meetings will take place on Tuesday afternoons during the designated parent engagement period. During the meetings the ENL teacher will discuss the goals of the program, the child's language development progress, assessment results and language development needs. The ENL teacher will get assistance from a bilingual staff member or utilize the NYC DOE interpretation unit to ensure that the meeting is conducted in the language that the parent or guardian best understands. The ENL teacher will keep sign in sheets and notes from individual parent meetings. The ENL teacher will also keep a log of outreach to parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are provided opportunities to be actively involved in establishing school based policies and recommendations by serving as members of the School Leadership Team or Parent Association. Parents are encouraged to attend our monthly PA meetings. The school encourages parents to share in student successes through monthly assemblies, which encourage students to succeed at the highest possible level. Parents are encouraged to assist in the school through a volunteer program. Parents may work in classrooms, the library, offices, and at other school activities to supplement and complement the efforts of the school. Title 1 workshops provide tips and strategies for parents to assist their children at home in their academic studies. Family Arts Engagement Workshops are provided by studio in a School and the Parent Coordinator and the ESL teacher encourage families of ELL's to participate. Regular written communication reflecting on-going day-to-day activities in the school is disseminated to the parents in their home language. The parent coordinator reaches out to parents in the preferred language (with the assistance of the translation and interpretation unit) to notify parents of these opportunities. 2018-19 CEP 65  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anne O'Grady, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 182 School DBN: 08X182 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anne O'Grady Title Principal Mary Oldak Assistant Principal Betty Williams Parent Coordinator Maria Galifi ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jamie Rodriguez Parent Wendaline Mercado Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Lopez Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Barbara Skokos School Counselor Karen Ames Kristy DelaCruz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X182 School Name: PS 182 Superintendent: Karen Ames The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Betty Williams Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language Surveys are reviewed by the classroom teacher to determine parents/guardians who require translation or oral interpretation services. Parent and phone contact by the Parent Coordinator and the ATS printouts will also be used to determine families who may require translation services. An (RSEC) Report was printed (Ethnic Census Report for PS 182) and the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) to identify the written and oral translation needs of the parents. This information is given to the classroom teachers. The Parent's Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ( indicates that the home languages at P.S. 182 are as follows: Home Language Arabic 10 (1.23%) Bengali 17 (2.09%) Spanish 82 (10.06%) English 744 (86.63%) 2018-19 CEP 69  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Cantonese English Mandinka Mossi Spanish Urdu 10 17 0 706 0 0 82 0 1.23 2.09 0 86.63 0 0.0 10.06 0 10 18 0 702 1 0 84 0 1.23 2.21 0 86.13 0.12 0 10.31 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. NYC Translation Unit ATS Translated documents Parent Letters Report Card Sept.- June 3X per year 2018-19 CEP 70  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school 4 Parent Teacher Conferences Sept, Nov., March and May plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Spanish translation available from staff NYC Translation unit telephone line services all other languages 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Staff and translation unit and 311 Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional Development on Chancellor's Regulation A-663 to be provided to staff on scheduled Monday professional development 2:40-4:00 p.m. All staff to attend. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 71  The School will provide parents whose primary language is a covered language with a translation of any document that contains individual, student-specific information regarding, but not limited to, a student’s: 1. health; 2. safety; 3. legal or disciplinary matters; 4. entitlement to public education or placement in any special education, English language learner or non-standard academic program; and 5. permission slips/consent forms. When the Translation and Interpretation Unit, a school, or a central or regional office is unable to provide required translation into one or more covered languages, it must provide, in addition to any other assistance, a cover letter or notice on the face of the English document in the appropriate covered language(s), indicating how a parent can request free translation or interpretation of such document. The school will provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Translated versions of this document, in the covered languages, are available at http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/Parents+Bill+of+Rights+and+Responsiblities.htm. The school has posted a sign in each of the covered languages and the most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent survey to be distributed to all parents with a preferred language other than English. Results will be tabulated and reviewed. 2018-19 CEP 72 
