2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 12X195 P.S. 195 Principal: UNAL KARAKAS 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 12X195 P.S. 195 321200010195 Elementary School PK-5 1250 Ward Avenue, Bronx, NY 10472 (718) 861-4461 Phone Number: (718) 861-7935 Fax: UnalKarakas ukarakas@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: UnalKarakas Jessica Renovales Veronica Ortiz Louis Slattery Laura Pantaleon N/A N/A na District Information Geographical District: 12 Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Road, Bronx, NY 10460 Superintendent’s Office Address: JRosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)328-2310 Phone Number: (718)542-7736 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Ave, Bronx, NY 10462/1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 NSaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: (718)828-7776/(718)741-8895 (718)828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) UnalKarakas Jessica Renovales Veronica Ortiz Iris Lopez Stephan Corretjer N/A N/A N/A Louis Slattery Elizabeth Dworkin *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Maria DeJesus Santos YesmelHernandez Gisselle Bisono N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ PA Secretary Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S. 195 is dedicated to ensuring that each student develops the skills required to achieve the highest levels of academic excellence. Through a partnership between parents, staff, and community, every child will gain a significant sense of compassion, fellowship, society, and develop a deep understanding acquired through the meaningful exploration of Literature, Mathematics, the Arts & Humanities, and Science. The activities implemented in every aspect of the learning environment will encourage inquiry, creativity, and the application of reasoning to instill and promote lifelong learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. School leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards, integrate the instructional shifts, and make purposeful decisions to build coherence and promote college and career readiness for all students. Curricula and academic tasks consistently emphasize rigorous habits and higher-order skills across grades and subject areas and for English Language Learners (ELLs) and students with disabilities (SWDs). Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data so that a diversity of learners, including ELLs and SWDs, has access to the curricula and tasks and are cognitively engaged. Our school collaborates with Generation Ready to support teacher growth and understanding of CCLS and how to differentiate for our school's high population of ELLs and SWDs. We also partner with Education through Music to support music and arts teachers' understanding of CCLS and provide interdisciplinary learning. The needs of our diverse learners are addressed utilizing Response to Intervention (RtI). Teachers are trained in successfully implementing RtI in their classrooms to address the specific needs of students based on data collected. Additionally, this multi-tier system of support facilitates in addressing the academic, social, emotional, and behavioral needs of students that are not demonstrating mastery or growth. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 195 is an elementary school with 969 students from grade Pre-K through grade 5. The school population comprises 14.8% Black, 81.3% Hispanic, 1.9%American Indian and 1.7% Asian students. The student body includes 31.4% English language learners and 23.9% special education students. Boys account for 51.5% of the students enrolled and girls account for 48.5%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-18 was 91%. We have 31% of our students living in temporary housing. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the last 2017-18 Principal Performance Observation: Areas of Celebration: 1.1, 1.2 and 2.2 The school has effectively implemented next steps provided in the feedback from the Fall PPO (November 20, 2017) in Quality Review indicators 1.1c, 1.2b and 2.2. School is engaging teachers in inter-visitations to push rigor and ensure multiple entry points are embedded within units and lesson plans, as well as ensuring that anchor charts and instructional resources are used to effectively support all learners; particularly ELLS and SWDs. From our class visits, a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  high degree of coherence was observed across classrooms with individual student’s reading and writing goals made public. There are common languages for student discourse from a turn and talk checklist, to a partnering structure, peer editing checklist, writing scaffolds via graphic organizes and sentence stems, and checklists for the task at hand. Students understood the purpose of the resources and were able to speak to how the systems support their learning. In a third-grade class, students were articulate and confident when discussing class routines and expectations. For instance one student supported another with locating and interpreting the teacher’s feedback on his work. In a fifth-grade class, one student and her partner engaged in peer editing and the feedback for peer was, “you said things like use transition words and how to work on using quotations in how to do that is write the quote on top and write in your own words what it means.” The level of student discourse is high; students use text based evidence and standards based language in providing feedback to each other. Student portfolios, work folders, and notebooks demonstrated high volume of student writing. The reading folders contained reading attributes per the level each student is at, and the description of skills for the next level up. The principal further ensures that the use of “how-to” is added to feedback as a mini-action item for students across ALL grades and subjects. Across classroom and grades, feedback on published work contains glow, grow and some how-to outlining skills for students to improve on. For example, a third-grade student shared: “I am using the how to in my next piece by using bigger words” as we looked at the writing in his writer’s notebook. Reading folders contain reader trackers for students to monitor their level progression and goals, with specific language from the reading progress rubric such as “I can use context clues to determine the meaning of words and phrases.” 4.1 The principal designed and facilitated a cycle of teacher observation and feedback that is ongoing and frequent. As of, February 14, 2018, 147 out of 231 (64%) required teacher observation reports were completed. February 14, 2018 marks the 101st day of the school year, and approximately 57% of the teacher observation window has elapsed. Therefore, the school’s pace of completing observations is above the suggested pace. In addition, all teachers with a completed teacher observation report received a rating for all eight ratable components. A review of a sample set of teacher evaluation reports indicate that ratings are based on low-inference evidence, and that teacher feedback from completed reports is specific and time-bound. Principal leads the teacher observation and feedback process at the school. Of the 147 completed reports in the system, the principal completed 53 (36%), more reports than any other school leader. Area of Focus 5.1 Principal and faculty should continue to build the promising practices they have implemented and regularly evaluate and adjust curricular and instructional practices, in response to student learning needs and the expectations of the CCLS (evaluation of practices of 1.1, 1.2, 2.2). He should also monitor the use of organizational resources, the quality of teacher team work, and professional development practices, with particular attention to the intervention strategies for slip-able and push-able students (evaluation of practices of 1.3, 4.1, 4.2). Next Steps: Principal should implement a cycle of inquiry on instructional practices that will move students’ performance, and develop systems to make the teaching and learning process visible to teachers and students alike. He should: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12   Continue to refine and adjust for higher level of student facing tools and resources, such as reading attributes in the lower grades, include graphic and student appropriate descriptors to allow students access and self-monitoring of their progress towards the next reading level.  Develop differentiated PD opportunities for teachers given the polarity of the teaching experiences among the faculty. He should provide opportunities for intervisitations and direct teaching to leverage and raise the levels of newer and developing teachers, allowing them to fine tune their lenses to see the bigger picture which focuses on student produced work products. For veteran and effective teachers, he should look at ways to help teachers shift teaching over to students, moving toward highly effective practices as described on the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Teachers should use explicit instruction and modeling strategies to help students develop the language and skills for independent learning.  Consider various ways to expose students to experiences outside of school to help build their prior knowledge base, i.e. cultural institutions, public parks, restaurant, museum, hiking, etc., to better prepare students for informational writing.  Consider ways to help develop students’ social, emotional and mindset towards sitting in a high-stakes test, in addition to preparing students’ test taking skills and knowledge base. He should capitalize on the school’s motto: “Reaching 212 degrees!” and develop taglines to remind students of effective and successful testing taking habits. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. Provide time for collaboration built in to teacher weekly schedule as a professional planning period which is facilitated by administration and instructional coaches. Inquiry work with targeted data analysis and refinements to daily lessons and unit plans are made as a result of this initiative. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X195 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 964 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 77 77 39 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 50 47 39 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 92.3% % Reduced Lunch 32.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.1% 79.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.09 0% 23% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 17.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 35% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 91 91 39 90.8% 0.6% 20.2% 16.2% 1.9% 2.4% 6 0% 8.4 17.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3.2 The school works to ensure that the implemented curricula is appropriately aligned to the CCLS; we will provide consistent and systematic support to all teachers across grades and subjects in order to assess and determine what students need to know across all grades. This will be accomplished during inquiry cycles utilizing the consultancy protocol as well as during weekly at grade meetings where student work will be assessed and strategies will be devised to enhance the curriculum. Grade leaders will meet monthly to share trends and patterns within their grade level classes. Added in the year 2017, content area leaders meet monthly to discuss trends using data sources and create planning for their grade teams. In addition, we have added instructional rounds where teacher leaders engage in visiting classrooms and supporting others in aligning instruction to CCLS and ensuring instruction is rigorous. 3.3 Teachers formally participate in grade-level meetings to discuss and align unit plans to CCLS across their grade. Together with administration and coaches, we incorporate differentiation for English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs). We will also continue to create CCLS aligned pacing calendars and unit plans across all grades that expose students to a progression of sequenced complex materials in order to promote higher-order thinking skills and help students analyze information. 3.4 The school leaders create opportunities for grade-level teacher teams to work on a regular basis by building in a professional planning period per week. This helps to ensure that students are exposed to a standards-based aligned curriculum that enables students to discover, create and communicate information using the arts, technology, and other 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  enrichment areas. Teachers meet to plan and refine unit plans, lesson plans, and use data to make changes to meet the differentiated needs of all students (inclusive of SWDs and ELLs). We will continue to create opportunities for all teachers to work in partnerships within and across grades vertically and horizontally on a regular basis targeting what is taught and why it is taught. They will also look at the progressions by grade level to understand mastery needed in each grade level and use that to differentiate instruction in their classrooms. All of this will be provided to teachers in the form of support through professional development. 3.5 The school collects timely data to identify patterns of student learning and shares it with teachers and instructional staff that leads to the differentiation of instruction and identification of student needs, in order to promote high levels of student learning and success. Data sources, formative and summative, will be utilized in order to adjust instruction to meet the needs of all learners. This practice will be conducted continuously in order to purposefully analyze students data and driving instructional practice, inclusive of running records. 2017-18 NYS ELA results indicates significant growth. The data for the school year is as follows: LEVEL ALL(% / #) ELL (% / #) SWD (% / #) 52% / 232 30% / 136 70% / 94 77% / 86 25% / 33 20% / 22 15% / 65 5% / 7 3% /3 3% /14 0% / 0 0% / 0 1 2 3 4 2017-2018 NYS Math results indicates following: LEVEL ALL (% / #) ELL (% / #) SWD (% / #) 78% / 86 1 2 3 60% / 271 76% / 107 23% / 104 14% / 20 16% / 18 13% / 59 8% / 11 4% / 4 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17 4% / 18 2%/ 3 2% / 2 4 From this data we found that school-wide we made significant gains in ELA and Math, outpacing the city's growth. We also had a higher performance than the Bronx borough average for ELL results on the State Math Exam. Additionally, we significantly reduced level 1s by close to 15%. We will continue to track data from various data points inclusive of using standards based trackers and implement differentiated PD to support teacher practice in both ELA and Math. A continued area of focus is also to ensure that implemented curricula further aligns to the Next Generation Learning Standards and provides instruction that is customized, inclusive, provides access, and motivating for all our students inclusive of their individual needs. We will identify access that is appropriate for all of our students. Our students will be actively engaged in activity that is rigorous and develops critical thinking skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 10% of ELL students will reach proficiency on the State ELA Exam, up 5 percentage points, as a result of using Reciprocal Reading and differentiation in reading workshop as measured by the 2019 NY State ELA Exam. . 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). As a newly selected Teachers College Project School for 2018-19 and having implemented TC for three school years, teachers will participate in further professional development provided at the school-level and outside PD provided at Teachers College with an emphasis on shared and guided reading, analyzing running records to inform instruction, and utilizing data successfully to drive individual support for all learners. Additionally, teachers will implement guided reading, close reading, and reciprocal reading strategies to support all learners and especially English Language Learners. Language objectives will also be infused into literacy lessons and curriculum maps to support language instruction within the literacy block. Teachers will also attend the District-level series Raising Readers to ensure that a variety of strategies are being implemented to accommodate diverse learners, allow for flexibility in instruction, and maximize instruction building coherence around whole and small group guided instruction. Additionally, teachers will receive PD support through weekly professional planning period meetings and through inquiry work done in vertical and horizontal teams. Lastly, teachers will build the capacity of their students to share how to utilize a revised checklist to assess mastery throughout a unit of study rather than at only one particular time in the unit. Grade 3 students will begin this work and then share it with grade 2 students to build their capacity. Utilizing various formative and summative assessments, teachers will analyze data to create strategic groups to meet the needs of diverse learners. They will then confer with students in these groups and implement strategies to meet the needs of learners. They will list these groups on lesson plans and in their data binders. Through scaffolding, language supports, and differentiated materials and resources teachers will address the needs of various learners. Teacher mentors and administration will model and provide support with utilizing data and meeting with strategic groups. In addition, teachers will use data to monitor interim progress of at-risk students, SWDs, ELLs and high-need subgroup populations (SIFE, STH). An ELL and Ready after school program will support the work around this goal. Five reading recovery teachers will also intervene for at-risk first grade students. We will extend after school to also include intensive balanced literacy support with opportunities for all Grades K-5 September 2018 – January 2019 All teachers (K-5), Staff Developers, Assistant Principals, and Principal, Grades K-5 January 2018– June 2019 Classroom teachers, teacher mentors, administration, Data Specialist, AIS Providers and SETTS 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19 Grades K-5 January 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Data Specialist, AIS Providers and Staff Developers Grades K-5 September 2018 – January 2019 School staff, teacher mentors, parents, students, and administrators the components of reading workshop and balanced literacy and one-on-one conferencing during independent reading. Utilizing the allocated parent involvement time on Tuesdays, school leaders and staff will provide a monthly workshop with a focus on balanced literacy and standards based learning. We will also utilize our school website, monthly calendars and newsletters to inform parents of the academic foci. Parents are also provided with workshops Spanish in order to deepen their understanding on balanced literacy and provided with tools to assist the students at home. Additionally, the principal Mr. Karakas will engage with parents on this work through his Coffee with the Principal initiative that takes place monthly. Teachers will further engage students in workshop model with the use of Teachers College Reading across grades K-5, which will allow students to work collaboratively and independently on their individualized goals. This will take place through guided instruction and small group instruction. Teachers will also be providing students with close reading and shared reading opportunities. Guided reading will play a heavy role in supporting student reading across levels. Teachers will use their data to differentiate their lessons and plan lessons with differentiation for ELL and SWD students in mind. Teachers will also confer with students daily, allowing students the opportunity to reflect on their learning and areas of need. They will set goals with students that students will be aware of and work on. In turn, teachers will utilize all of this information to adjust their future instruction and plan accordingly to meet the needs of all learners. Additionally, teachers will successfully analyze running record data to implement small group instruction that is targeted to meet individual student needs. This will inform teacher planning for guided and shared reading. Teachers in K-2 will also provide additional Fundations intervention to small groups of students based on data analysis. Teacher mentors, with the professional development they receive in the d12 New Teacher Mentor initiative and assistant principals will model the workshop model for teachers, model how to differentiate in classrooms, and provide actionable feedback and support teachers as necessary. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Each grade will hold a monthly parent workshop on Tuesdays where teachers provide strategies on how parents can support their children at home. These parent workshops engage parents in understanding rigorous instruction aligned to the Common core standards. Monthly Coffee with the principal will include discussion on how to support students. Additional parent networking and parent workshops will be held by the parent coordinator to build sustainable growth in parent involvement so that parents and families understand CCLS. Parents as Learning Partners offer parents the opportunity to work in the classroom with their child and the teacher and further build networking with parents and families. This allows them the opportunity to engage in a hands on lesson with their child and understand the Common Core standards and expectations. Additionally, based on our IIT, we will provide one high leverage growth area for students in between progress reports and report cards to communicate to parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. New teachers will be provided additional support at the school level by trained teacher mentors as part of the District 12 New Teacher Mentoring Program. We will also acquire services from Teachers College and Generation Ready. Two (2) consultants will provide a combined total of fifty (50) sessions over the course of the year in ELA, Math, and ELL supports. Teachers, Service Providers, Data Specialist, Staff Developers, and School Leaders will work collaboratively with Generation Ready staff to achieve this goal. The school will utilize the Workshop Model with Teacher's College Reading and Writing curriculum to allow for flexibility, differentiation, and targeted instruction. This will be done through strategic unit and lesson planning support. The after-school program will be offered to all students in grades 2-5. We plan to hire 15 teachers three to four days a week for 6 hours (15 teachers x 6 hours x 40 sessions). Administration will accommodate scheduling needs as needed. We will also allocate funds to hire four new reading recovery teachers to support targeted first grade intervention for at least 40 students, to help support the close of the achievement gap in the early grades. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will be differentiating their instruction with balanced literacy within reading workshop and reciprocal reading for ELLs and SWDs which will lead to a 2% increase in student proficiency as measured by i-Ready data. Update February 2019, we are on track to meeting the goal and will continue to work towards it. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year ELA and Math benchmarks measured by i-Ready formative assessment data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Data to support student social/emotional well being is reflected with 33% chronic absenteeism in 2017-18 school year, as well as 31% of students living in temporary housing. The Quality Review cited this area of Supportive Environment as being a proficient practice. The following was outlined: 5.2 The school has developed a system to address the social and emotional developmental health needs of students, which allows them to refer and support developmental health and academic success of students; however, the school needs to increase the use of data to identify areas of need that impact students. 5.3 The school has developed an understanding of the skills and behaviors connected to student's social and emotional health through the school-wide use of the Safety Ownership Attitude and Respect (S.O.A.R) matrix to support students social, emotional, and academic growth; however, the school needs to continue to build adult capacity in terms of supporting students’ social and emotional developmental health. 5.4 The school has established a safe environment for students both socially and emotionally through the use of Positive Behavior Intervention System; however, teachers still struggle with their role in supporting students’ social and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  emotional development, and how it ties into the school vision, hindering them from supporting students to this regard, or articulating this support to parents. 5.5 School leaders and staff, to include but not limited to teachers, guidance counselors, the dean, data specialist, paraprofessionals and school aides, will continue to work together to utilize data Online Occurrence Report System, I-Log reports and observed behaviors in various settings to respond to students’ social and emotional developmental health needs. The school will work on continuing to develop supports for students to ensure chronic absenteeism is reduced by further supporting students socially, emotionally, and academically to develop the whole child. The Attendance Team will make phone calls to students who are highlighted as "pushable" students in the attendance tiers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% reduction in chronic absenteeism year over year by moving into Phase 4 (refinement) of PBIS to build an inclusive and supportive learning environment for all students, utilizing the Restorative Justice Approach in classrooms, measured by the school Attendance report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate in professional development opportunities provided at the school level around Tier 1 positive behavioral interventions that can be utilized in classrooms, including professional development presented by Ramapo and BrainPower as well as teacher leaders and other school personnel who attended Restorative Justice training. The correlation of attendance and increase of academic progress will be addressed in these trainings. In each session strategies to address the needs of SWDs, ELLs, and identified high-needs students will be addressed by utilizing the Citywide Behavioral Expectations to Support Student Learning, as well as positive reinforcement strategies utilizing the Restorative Justice Program and training. The Pre-Referral Intervention Manual and Behavior Intervention Manual (PRIM). Each teacher will be provided a hard copy and link to the Citywide Behavioral Expectations and grade leader will have a copy of the PRIM that is accessible to teachers. School staff will continue to support PBIS by implementing the use of SOAR Bucks and Commendations Cards as a positive reinforcement. Teachers will conduct a parent workshop during the first open house event on how attendance effects classroom academic performance. They will also be shown how to utilize anod communicate with teachers through Classroom Dojo. Additionally, Ramapo and Brain Power will conduct parent workshops. Regular communication with parents through Classroom Dojo will be conducted to inform families about students’ positive behavior and areas in need of growth. Teachers will incorporate Restorative Justice Strategic intervention as well as Brain Power into their weekly social emotional activities and training for parents during parent communication time. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School leaders, Deans, Guidance Counselors and, social worker, PBIS Team, Ramapo Consultant, Attendance Team, Attendance Teachet Grades K-5 September 2018 – January 2019 Grades K-5 September 2018– January 2019 School leaders, Deans, PBIS Coordinator, school counselor. social worker, Teachers, Ramapo consultants, Attendance Team, Attendance Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  Parents and students will be invited to attend a beginning of year Pep Rally to kick off PBIS, promoting positive behavior and increasing attendance rate. Additionally, parents will be invited to monthly SOAR assemblies to celebrate students’ being recognized for exemplary behavior with SOAR student certificates and attendance for the month. Students will engage in student council and take ownership of coming up with positive behavior promotions and events school wide under the tutelage of teacher facilitators. Student Council members will help support 2nd graders in creating posters that encourage students to help keep the school environment clean, giving a sense of pride and community. Parents will be invited to participate in Tuesday Parent Engagement Training for positive behavior strategies inclusive of restorative justice. Staff members who will continue to serve as leaders in PBIS will participate in a Tier 3, check-in check-out protocol. Each staff members will be assigned to one student and meet with the student daily in the morning and afternoon to monitor student progress toward individual goals. The students will be identified for Tier 3 intervention through the analysis of various data sources inclusive of ATS, Classroom Dojo, and PPT Team referrals. If students in Tier 3 meet their goals for a week, students will receive a positive incentive that will be determined by Attendance Team. The guidance staff will identify one universal strategy to reduce student test anxiety and present to students. To ensure teachers are working towards the same strategy the guidance staff will meet with grade level teachers and students, when age-appropriate, to develop grade specific test anxiety reduction strategies and a plan for sharing strategies with students. School leaders will meet with the brain power teacher leader to designate a specific area in the cafeteria for brain breaks and select one brain break activity to be implemented by school aides during lunch for Grades 4 and 5. We will monitor the impact of these techniques via the Online Occurrence Reporting System reports and discuss behaviors observed in the cafeteria. The team will then use this data to plan modifications and implementation of brain breaks during lunch in other grade levels. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Grades K-5 September 2018 – January 2019 School leaders, Deans, PBIS Team, school counselor and social worker, Attendance Team, Attendance Teacher Grades K-5 January 2019– June 2019 All Staff, School leaders, Deans, PBIS Coordinator, SIT Team, Attendance Team, Attendance Teacher Grades 3-5 January 2019-February 2019 Guidance Team, Classroom Teams Grades 4-5 January 2019-March 2019 School leaders, Dean, PBIS Team, SIT Team, School Aides, Classroom Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to attend workshops hosted by teachers regarding the use of Classroom Dojo as well as partake in workshops outlining the use of Restorative Justice strategies. Our parent coordinator will also arrange parent workshops hosted by P.S 195 and The Mental Health Association of New York City to better equip parents with the tools needed to cope with everyday situations. The Mental Health Association of New York City will be offering their free Circle of Security Parenting Classes for parents. The program is aimed at helping parents be the best caregivers they can be. Session are facilitated in English and Spanish. The structure of the program is based on years of research about secure parent-child relationships and how to support them. In each class, participants will talk 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  about the importance of forming secure attachments with their children by focusing on the caregiver and child interactions; being responsive to their child’s needs; and reflecting on their parental strengths and challenges. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Leaders, staff, parents, and students will work collaboratively to achieve this goal. Novelty items will be purchased through Shop DOE for use in the S.O.A.R. Store where students will redeem S.O.A.R. bucks. S.O.A.R Awards will be presented to one student from each class at our monthly S.O.A.R. Assembly. During these monthly celebrations classes will also be awarded for their collaborative efforts in maintaining a positive school environment as they earn commendation cards. Additional, Pre-Referral Intervention Manual and Behavior Intervention Manuals will be purchased as needed to ensure access and use. Also, money will be used to hire Ramapo and Brain Power to support teachers in supporting student social emotional well being. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 1 1/2% decrease in chronic absenteeism year over year analyzed by the Attendance Team and school Attendance Data. Update: Based on current data and monitoring we have met and exceeded our annual goal in decreasing chronic absenteeism by over 3%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance Data, check-in and check-out data, SOAR award distribution, commendation card celebration system Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards X (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Using the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, 97% of teachers state that they design instructional programs together. 100% of teachers state that they talk with one another about instruction. With high collaborative practice in place, the school will be ensuring that inquiry protocols are solidified to further support student achievement. Additionally, according to the feedback from our 2016-2017 Quality Review which is utilized to further support our planning, the following was assessed: As a school we have Professional Planning Periods weekly in order to ensure that instructional practices and strategies implemented in the classroom are both rigorous and goal-comprehensive. In addition, we have Grade leader meetings to review school wide expectations. The teachers have access to data in the Google drive, I-ready data and Datacations which allows the teachers to review the data in order to plan their lessons effectively. Teachers are also given support for their ENL students through an ENL consultant that supports the school. We also have a Math and Literacy consultant support our teachers with the curriculum. The instructional coaches are trained by New Teacher Center to support all teachers in using best practices. Teachers actively receive feedback after formal, informal and grow and glow visits. We provide weekly professional development sessions in order to help the teachers address the needs of students with disabilities and ENL students. Teachers meet with Administration to discuss data each semester to discuss trends and patterns. Teachers are asked to demonstrate how they have used the data to impact their lesson development to meet the needs of their students. Additionally, teachers work collaboratively on the implementation of the data by observing 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  each others' lesson and discussing next steps in order to drive their instruction. Teachers look at student work and use Common Core-aligned tasks to address gaps and supplements. Needs: Teachers will ensure that they use instructional practices and strategies that are adaptive and aligned to plans for groups of students with a variety of needs and learning styles (including students with disabilities, English Language Learners and other sub-groups). Teachers will provide timely and appropriate instructional interventions and extensions for all students. Teachers will use data to establish short- and long-term goals with learning trajectories for groups of students based on identified and timely needs. Teachers will continue to actively involve students in their own learning by providing actionable feedback and goals. Teachers will work on collegial inquiry to come up with one or two high leverage strategies to implement as a grade. Teachers in K-5 will all be well versed in analyzing data from inquiry to then use the data to drive their teaching practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will engage in structured collaborative learning through professional inquiry by collaborating to refine teaching practices in unit plans and lesson plans, and by developing teacher leadership capacity within the inquiry process, leading to an impact on student achievement as measured by 5% growth on the NYS ELA and Math State Test. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate in professional development opportunities provided at the school level around the consultancy protocol, and topics to improve student growth. Teachers will analyze item analysis for grade and identify standards to be addressed in inquiry. Added to this year's inquiry work will be a mid-inquiry cycle assessment for progress monitoring and to revise plans as needed. This will lead to teachers becoming reflective in their own practice and successfully monitoring student growth. Teachers will create task aligned to standards and targeted inquiry focus group. During inquiry sessions teachers will utilize the consultancy protocol to engage in professional conversations, which will allow them to analyze student work and teacher practice, providing the presenter with collegial feedback. Facilitation will rotate during each cycle of inquiry, therefore building the capacity of each of the participants. New teachers will receive support from Administration and Instructional coaches who have been trained by the District 12 New Teacher Center Mentoring program. These teachers will receive professional development using New Teacher Center tools and online support. In addition, our IEP facilitator will work with teachers on creating well written IEPs that are then used to plan differentiated learning for SWDs. Our ENL consultant will work with ENL teachers, both at an individual level, and as a whole group cohort to provide ongoing training and support for implementing various ENL strategies in classrooms to build coherence across classrooms and also support for learners. Professional development will be provided to staff on best practices to support ELLs and SWDs. High needs subgroup of "pushable" student target population will be targeted during inquiry work and tracked for progress with ongoing benchmark assessments. The collaborative inquiry process will also be supported by our special ed teachers and ENL teachers for additional scaffolds and supports to differentiate for students and for teachers to utilize in their classrooms for those specific subgroups. Additionally, teachers will provide targeted intervention for this subgroup of students during Grades K-5 September 2018 – February 2019 Staff Developers, Data Specialist, All Teachers, Assistant Principals, and Principal Grades K-5 February 2019– June 2019 ENL Coordinator, IEP Facilitator, Data Specialist, Staff Developers, All Teachers, Assistant Principals, and Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  weekly instruction and monitor impact of the work weekly. The data analysis will then be used to modify teaching practices immediately. Parents will participate in monthly workshops during the Tuesday parent engagement time, that will introduce them to the instructional strategies that their children are being expected to implement. Parents will also be notified if their students are being provided additional intervention as part of the inquiry cycle. These parent workshops will be interactive and provide parents/guardians with the skills to support their children at home, supporting the home-school connection, especially to support ELLs and SWDs. Additionally, monthly newsletters will dedicate a section that will provide instructional strategies to support current units of study. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Grades K-5 January 2018– June 2019 ENL Coordinator, IEP Facilitator, Data Specialist, Staff Developers, All Teachers, Assistant Principals, and Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will participate in monthly workshops, during the Tuesday parent engagement time, that will introduce them to the instructional strategies that their children are being expected to implement. These workshops will be interactive and provide parents/guardians with the skills to support their children at home, supporting the home-school connection. Additionally, monthly newsletters will dedicate a section that will provide instructional strategies to support current units of study. We will have workshops for parents to sign up for key software that will support them with their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will acquire services from Generation Ready. Three (3) consultants will provide the following sessions over the course of the year:  ELA 10 sessions  Math 20 sessions  ENL 10 sessions New teachers will be provided additional support at the school level by trained teacher mentors and school leaders as part of the District 12 New Teacher Center Mentoring Program. We will also recruit a team of 12 staff members to plan grade specific professional development to turn key to their corresponding grade during common planning. Additionally, our TC Staff Developers will help support our ELA and Math inquiry work aligning the support to the school's goals as well as the mission and vision. We will also provide after school workshops and book club studies on Math and ELA best practices, that will be run by our mentors/instructional coaches. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will have engaged in collaborative and reflective inquiry in ELA and Math, which will lead to a 2.5% growth in i-Ready formative assessment data. Update: As of February 2019, teachers have made an increase of 5% in i-Ready ELA and Math formative assessment data. This surpasses our mid-year goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2019 School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. X 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, 97% of teachers stated that the principal makes clear to staff his expectations for meeting instructional goals. 97% of teachers stated that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress. 97% of teachers also stated that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. Additionally, strengths identified in our latest Quality Review included: -School leaders shared a focus on writing and reasoning that allows students to explain and justify their thinking. To prepare students for college and career, the curriculum maps include exposure to articles, trade books, highlighting, note taking, annotating texts, and peer activities. Teachers believe the reading and writing units enable students to think critically and synthesize information. New York City core curricula is used in mathematics, science, and social studies. A grade five writing unit requires that students find reasons and evidence from various articles to support opinions. A grade five math unit on addition and subtraction of decimals focuses on building fluency and real world applications. Across classrooms, the instructional shifts were evident and instruction aligned to state standards. -In a kindergarten lesson plan, activities were planned for three groups, students who needed support were provided with cubes, manipulatives, and varying ways of representation through drawing. Lesson plans included varied instructional materials that meet the different levels of learners and use of varied texts that support various readability 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  levels of students. Curriculum units include differentiation for ELLs, students with disabilities, and advanced learners. Lesson plans include supports and use of visuals, vocabulary, graphic organizers, and sentence starters. Language objectives are included in lesson plans. As a school focus, learning targets are written in a student friendly language. Teachers shared that coaches help them with unit and lesson modifications. Technology provided students with visual supports for the lesson to promote access in lessons. Several lesson plans contained planned group outcomes with student names. In one plan, the teacher also listed three enrichment students as well as partners and those working in an independent activity. Another lesson plan listed three tiered activities including student names for a writing lesson on techniques to sway the reader. -In addition, from classroom observations, there is evidence that more work needs to be done to support ELL and SWD students. -The school leaders have consistently communicated clear expectations for their beliefs about how students learn best. These beliefs are clearly aligned to the domains and components of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Classroom visits reflected teachers’ implementation of pedagogical practices aligned to these beliefs. -Provide continued monitoring of teachers’ planning and lesson delivery to ensure that effective planning results in effective classroom practices, based on the relevant data in reading, writing, and mathematics. Consider prioritizing teachers’ focus based on data derived from the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) for the English language learner subgroup of students. -31% of our students are ELL students and our school has been part of a district initiative to support teachers in supporting ENL students within the district through Reciprocal Reading. Additionally, Principal Karakas has attended Advanced Literacy training to support the work for ENL students in the school. Priority Needs based on latest PPO and Quality Review: -The school should develop differentiated PD opportunities for teachers given the polarity of the teaching experiences among the faculty. They should provide opportunities for inter-visitations and direct teaching to leverage and raise the levels of newer and developing teachers, allowing them to fine tune their lenses to see the bigger picture which focuses on student produced work products. The school should consider various ways to expose students to experiences outside of school to help build their prior knowledge base, i.e. cultural institutions, public parks, restaurant, museum, hiking, etc., to better prepare students for informational writing. -School leaders will create professional development opportunities for teachers to meet with specialty cluster teachers, such as art, music, movement/dance, and technology teachers, to plan units and lessons for enhanced interdisciplinary curricula connections. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will design and implement a differentiated professional development plan to build teacher capacity in differentiating instruction for ELLs and SWDs resulting in 25% of teachers increasing one level in Danielson 3c. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  2018-19 SCEP-FF 34 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers (K-5), Staff Developers, Generation Ready Consultants, Assistant Principals, and Principal Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Grades K-5 September 2018 – June 2019  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During the allocated 80 minutes of professional development, all staff members will participate in mandated professional development weekly and provided at the school level. PD will be targeted to support differentiation for ELLs and SWDs until January of 2019. Additional PD topics from January 2019 to June 2019 will revolve around additional supports with research based journals/articles, Bureau of Educational Research materials (BER), district-level instructional materials, outsourced PD that instructional leaders and staff members attend, PD sessions offered by contracted presenters such as Generation Ready consultants, District 12 representatives, and inter-school visitations that showcase best practices, and TC Staff Developer for writing and reading, as well as immersion into reciprocal teaching strategies for reading. The professional development will be given in cohorts, both as whole group to develop common understanding of differentiation, as well as in small groups. In smaller groups teachers will meet for mandated support on differentiated topics in a three week cycle giving teachers an opportunity to be immersed, apply the skills, and time to reflect on best practices. The instructional focus will be targeted throughout cycles in our PD plan to ensure all staff are receiving continuous development. Facilitators will highlight innovative ways to target the diverse learners in their classrooms. The PD plan initiatives will also be supported with Instructional Coaches that will align specific and targeted teacher goals also aligned with the school's goals and district goals. The instructional coaches will receive training and support through weekly instructional cabinet meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  New teachers will be provided additional mandated support at the school level by trained teacher mentors weekly as part of the District 12 New Teacher Mentoring Program. We will hold two retreats throughout the school year to target this area of engaging students in learning through differentiating instruction and providing our teachers with multiple opportunities to share best practices on how students learn best. We will then visit classrooms to see implementation of these practices. We will pay for ELL consultants to support teachers and train them on best practices. They will be supporting teachers every other week. We will have an after school ELL intervention program to support ELL learners starting in October of 2018. We will put money toward investing in i-Pads and laptops for ELL classes and SWD students for differentiation. All staff members will be supported with targeted PD that also highlights district initiatives for ELL and Special Ed. populations. The following PD topics will be: Grades K-5 September 2018 – June 2019 - Classroom management -Depth of Knowledge (Higher order thinking questions) -Differentiation -Actionable feedback -Formative and summative assessment -Writing progression -Writing process -Reading workshop routines and conferencing -Guided reading support -Peer and self assessment Classroom teachers, Staff Developers, Generation Ready Consultants, Teachers, Assistant Principals, and Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  -Effective IEP writing -Conferencing -TC Reading & Writing -PBIS and crisis intervention -Math feedback and strategies -Math accountable talk and increasing student engagement -Reciprocal Reading -Utilizing Qtel rubric to support ELLs -Incorporating the 4 Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy -Scaffolds that are appropriate and supportive of student learning Families will continue to be offered Common Core Workshops to understand the instructional expectations for our students. During these workshops, parents are supported with informative handouts that align to the curriculum and school expectations. The families at P.S. 195 will participate in monthly parent workshops provided by classroom teachers, parent workshops with the parent coordinator,Coffee with the Principal and Parents as Learning Partners. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Grades K-5 September 2018 – June 2019 Classroom teachers, parent coordinator, parents, students, and administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Each grade will hold a monthly parent workshop where teachers provide strategies on how parents can support their children at home. These parent workshops engage parents in understanding rigorous instruction aligned to the Common core standards. Monthly Coffee with the Principal will include discussion on how to support students. Monthly parent workshops will be held by the parent coordinator. Parents as Learning Partners offer parents the opportunity to work in the classroom with their child and the teacher and learn more about the curriculum. This allows them the opportunity to engage in a hands on lessons with their child and further support their child at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The School-Based Professional Development Committee will work collaboratively with grade leaders and administrators to develop a PD plan that will address the needs identified by the staff by providing differentiated PD opportunities. Teachers will be provided appropriate time to prepare workshop materials prior to turn-keying information to staff. We will purchase supplies to include printer ink, copier toner, paper, binders, dividers, and sheet protectors for all teachers, to facilitate in maintaining data. Administrators will adjust schedules as needed and utilize sub-teachers to provide coverage. New mentors will be funded as instructional coaches in the building who will also serve to build teacher capacity and train all of our grade teams on creating a unified understanding of best teaching practices. We will conduct retreats two times throughout the school year to work with our teachers and build capacity and share best practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, 10% of teachers will increase one level in Danielson 3c compared to 2017-18 as measured by the administrative team using Advance data. Update: As of February 2019, more than 10% of teachers have already made an increase of one level in Danielson 3c. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from Advance and 2019 school survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, 89% of families stated that they have seen their child's assessments. 94% of parents state they have attended parent-teacher conferences. An area of need is to ensure that parents are given the opportunity to further volunteer in the school. Also according to the feedback from our latest Central-Led Review the following was assessed as our priority needs: School leaders and staff consistently communicate expectations connected to a path to college and career readiness, and offer ongoing feedback to help families understand student progress towards those expectations. Teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that consistently communicates high expectations for all students, and offer ongoing and detailed feedback and guidance/advisement supports that prepare students for the next level. Our area of focus is to continue to increase parent engagement through monthly calendars, notices and reminders, and to survey parents on workshops they will benefit from to support the various needs of learners in our school. This is especially true in ensuring parents feel that they can volunteer in the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 12X195 will provide monthly activities and outreach to parents based on parental feedback which will result in a 15% increase (from 59% to 74%) in the percentage of parents who will agree or strongly agree that since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school, sometimes or often as measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) In order to ensure a variety of activities that involve parents we will offer the following workshops: Grades PK-5 September 2018– June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Coaches, Parent Coordinator, Family workers and secretary. · Restorative Justice training · I-Ready training · Classroom Dojo training - Brain Power parent training · Department of Health led workshops · Positive Behavioral Intervention workshops · Strategies to support students in ELA and Math . Parent Engagement Tuesdays monthly workshops for curriculum support - Parents as Learning Partners once a month - Coffee with the Principal once a month - Open houses for parents four times this school year In addition to the aforementioned parents will be invited to observe and participate in Parents as Learning Partners activities for ELA and Math. During these monthly parent engagement activities parents will visit classrooms and partake in the learning process. We also will invite parents and families to participate in festive activities to include , but not limited to: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  · Pep rallies · Math and literacy nights · Movie nights · Carnivals · Special assemblies · Holiday and spring concerts Theater Performance Book fair · Fun Run activity - Cookshop for Families - Harlem Magic Masters · Jump rope for Heart activity · Friendship Dance · Halloween Walk · Respect for all Walk · Publishing celebrations school wide Additionally, the school will provide timely and effective communication with parents through the use of the following: · School Messenger · Parent outreach Tuesday afternoons · Teachers being accessible through DOE email at all times as well as Classroom Dojo - School website · Monthly newsletters · Promotion conferences - Coach's newsletters 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  - Principal and administrative memos and letters - Grade specific calendars and newsletters · Distribution of report cards and three three interim progress reports (November 2018, March 2019, June 2019) In order to ensure a timely and consistent communication we will backpack notices, announce it on the monthly calendar, School Messenger calls home as well as our school website. This information will also be displayed on our interactive boards in our main office, which are updated with all announcements and relative information. As a school community we will work on creating an environment that builds trust through the following: · Parent workshops · Student council elections · Family and student community walks . Parent Engagement Tuesdays Teachers will receive professional development on Classroom Dojo, which will be utilized for parent communication Parents will receive workshops tailored to students with disabilities and English Language Learners, hosted by coaches, parent coordinator, administration, and teachers. These workshops will provide information on services provided to students and to also give families tips on how to support students at home. Through our collaboration with the Office of Adult and Continuing Education we will support parents in their learning, which will in essence support their understanding of a supportive environment and the Common Core to strengthen student learning. In addition to Open House and three Parent-Teacher Conference dates, we will inform parents of regular student progress on Common Core Learning Standards via progress reports, Pupilpath, I-Ready assessment results, parent teacher meetings, guidance counselor intervention, phone calls, email, postal correspondence and other informal assessments. Grades PK-5 September 2018 – June 2019 Grades PK-5 September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Coaches, Parent Coordinator, Family workers and secretary. Administration, Teachers, Coaches, Parent Coordinator, Family workers and secretary. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Families will be invited to attend workshops hosted by our Parent Coordinator, Teachers/Instructional Coaches, and Administrators. Our parent coordinator will also arrange parent workshops hosted by P.S 195 and The Mental Health Association of New York City to better equip parents with the tools needed to cope with everyday situations. Teachers and instructional coaches will host workshops that help parents and families support their student at home and how to utilize electronic resources to support their efforts. The Principal will host monthly gathers, Coffee with the Principal, to provide parents updates on school progress and plans for improves, in additional to any upcoming events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Weekly parent workshops and/or individual parent meetings will be conducted regularly. Principal's Coffee with the Principal will be held monthly. Continuous use of reciprocal communication methods will also be utilized. Translation services, paper supplies used for notifications and School Messenger will be utilized to facilitate with this goal. Supplies will be purchased to ensure ongoing and consistent communication to include color paper, printer ink, and copier toner. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 3% increase in parent participation in attendance at all combined activities as shown on attendance sheets. Update: As of February 2019, there has been a greater than 3% increase in parent participation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2019 School Survey will be used. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students demonstrating below grade level performance in ELA who are receiving Tier 1 intervention administered by the classroom teacher but have not demonstrated the ability to make progress over a 6 week period. Teacher / parent referral. Grade level performance measured by the following Assessments: ● Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment ● Teacher's College Assessments in Reading and Language Arts ● MOSLtasks ● Teacher Observations Students demonstrating below grade level performance in Math Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Teach reading skills with a focus on reading comprehension, fluency, vocabulary, phonics, sight words, writing activities, and games TIerII- Push-In/Pull-Out AIS Small group instruction Tier III- One-to-one session When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and after school for balanced literacy approach to intervention Program materials include: ● Reading A-Z ● Starfall ● MyON ● Fundations Tier I ● Fountas & Pinnell Intervention ● Teacher Created Materials - Reading Recovery Teach with a focus on problem solving, vocabulary, use of TIerII- Push-In/Pull-OutAISSmall group instruction During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  Science who are receiving Tier 1 intervention administered by the classroom teacher but have not demonstrated the ability to make progress over a 6 week period. Teacher / parent referral. Grade level performance measured by the following Assessments: •GoMath! Benchmark Assessments •GoMath! Chapter Tests •GoMath! Performance Task -Teacher observations Students demonstrating below grade level performance in ELA who are receiving Tier 1 intervention administered by the classroom teacher but have not demonstrated the ability to make progress over a 6 week period. Teacher / parent referral. Grade level performance measured by the following Assessments: manipulatives, and games Tier III- One-to-one session Program materials include: •GoMath! RtI •Teachercreated tasks -inquiry related teacher created materials based on standard data. TIerII- Push-In/Pull-OutAISSmall group instruction During the school day Tier III- One-to-one session Utilizing non-fiction test providers will teach reading skills with a focus on reading comprehension, fluency, vocabulary, and writing activities. Program materials include: •Reading A-Z •Starfall •MyON •Teacher Created Materials Reading Recovery 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) •Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment •CCLS aligned content specific Unit Assessments -TC non-fiction unit tasks -Science assessments Students demonstrating below grade level performance in ELA who are receiving Tier 1 intervention administered by the classroom teacher but have not demonstrated the ability to make progress over a 6 week period. Teacher / parent referral. Grade level performance measured by the following Assessments: •Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment •CCLS aligned content specific Unit Assessments -TC non-fiction unit tasks -Social studiesassessments Utilizing the RtI ladder of referral protocol, students will be referred to the PPTTeam for the TIerII- Push-In/Pull-OutAISSmall group instruction During the school day Tier III- One-to-one session Utilizing non-fiction test providers will teach reading skills with a focus on reading comprehension, fluency, vocabulary, and writing activities. Program materials include: •Reading A-Z •Starfall •MyON •Teacher Created Materials Crisis intervention, peer-mediation, conflict resolution Small group intervention & 1:1 During the school day Social and emotional supports are 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  appropriate at-risk service. PPTteam will review referrals and meet with teachers. provided confidentially. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 300 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide book bags, school supplies, uniforms, gym clothes, and provide information about outside services available. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. •We will provide various opportunities (internally and externally) to improve teacher content knowledge and build capacity by building lab-sites with the support of our consultants and have teachers visit the lab-site classrooms to view best practices. -We will utilize our two model teachers to support intervisitation for teachers and to share best practices to further create alignment across all classrooms. •We will provide continuous professional development and support to enhance teaching methods and practices as they relate to access to grade-level instruction and achievement for students with disabilities and ELLs. Our professional development will be differentiated and tailored for individual teacher needs. •We will provide support and train teachers to use EngageNY to create rigorous and differentiated learning plans to facilitate teacher growth. -We will have new teachers all receive high quality mentoring from our four instructional coaches, all of whom are taking part in the district 12 New Teacher Center mentoring program. The mentor teachers will provide differentiated and targeted support for teachers, observe lessons and give feedback, and also model lessons and expectations for our teachers. -We will recruit highly qualified teachers by looking for fully licensed teachers in job fairs and on New Teacher Finder. All candidates will undergo a rigorous interview process geared toward their license area where they role play scenarios, analyze data, and self-reflect on their teaching. -The principal will take on supporting new teachers with their development, and also hold monthly meetings with all new teachers to provide differentiated support and guidance. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). •We will provide various opportunities (internally and externally) to improve teacher content knowledge and build capacity by having planning sessions that are Common Core aligned and digging deeper into the standards. -Mentors that are part of the D12- New Teacher Center Mentoring program will use their knowledge and training from the program to provide targeted and individualized support and professional development for all new teachers. -Professional development will be differentiated based on teacher feedback on observations and an observation and PD tracker will be developed by the administrative team to monitor impact of differentiated PDs. •We will provide continuous professional development and support to enhance teaching methods and practices as they relate to access to grade-level instruction and achievement for students with disabilities and ELLs •We will provide support and train to use EngageNY to create a customized learning plan to facilitate in their own professional growth Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Our transition plan includes, but is not limited to: -Pre-K Thrive, a mayoral initiative, will increase opportunities for pre-K children to realize their potential by building a foundation of social and emotional skills during this critical stage of development, which in essence will facilitate in their transition to elementary school. -Through the Thrive track we will receive instructional and family level tools with evidence-based strategies for supporting children's social-emotional development, behavioral regulation skills, and family engagement, as well as support from a DECE Social Worker in implementing these practices. -Thrive will also implement workshops for families during non-school hours to support transition. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  -The NYCDOE DECE Common Core aligned units of study will also facilitate in students social-emotional growth. -Joint professional development with Kindergarten teachers to ensure that the skills needed for the next grade are infused in the current curriculum -Parent involvement activities such as family activity days and classroom visits scheduled by teachers -Sharing of records/info- Google Drive is an access point for shared data, as well as Datacation .Updated 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The decision making process regarding the use and selection of appropriate assessment measures and professional development is created by the MOSL Team, PD Team, and the instructional cabinet. All grades are represented in the teams to ensure that there is equity of voice and that professional development is tailored to the individual needs of grades and teams in the building. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5a, Part 4 Section 5b, Part 4 Section 5c, Part 4 Section 5d, Part 4 Section 5a, Part 4 Section 5b, Part 4 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 970,318.00 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal $0 $161,745 Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  Title II, Part A Federal 68,018.00 27,904.00 Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 5,668,199.00 Tax Levy (FSF) Local X X X Section 5c, Part 4 Section 5d, Part 4 Section 5a, Part 4 Section 5b, Part 4 Section 5c, Part 4 Section 5d, Part 4 Section 5a, Part 4 Section 5b, Part 4 Section 5c, Part 4 Section 5d, Part 4 Section 5a, Part 4 Section 5b, Part 4 Section 5c, Part 4 Section 5d, Part 4 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 195, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. P.S. 195 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact P.S. 195 School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 195 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best, persevere through challenges 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III funds will provide supplementary instruction for ELLs during our Saturday ELL Excellence Program. The program will target all ELLs in grades 1-5. It will provide additional instructional opportunities for ELLs who are at risk and potential long-term ELLs not making significant gain in the NYSESLAT. Based on 2017 NYSESLAT data of the 248 students tested, 44 advanced 1 proficiency level; 2 advanced 2 proficiency levels; 66 students remained at the same proficiency level; and 50 regressed 1 proficiency level. The program will focus on both literacy and math; however to address the modalities of need we have included an oral language development component and extensive writing activities to improve comprehension and writing skills. The program will be offered to all identified ELL students including Special Education students according to Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) to help students attain English proficiency in grades 1-5. The Saturday program will begin in October of 2018 and extend to May of 2019. The program will be held every Saturday (excluding holidays) from 8:30 -11:30. A total of 43 sessions will be funded with Title III funds and supplements with Title I funds. Three of our highly qualified licensed ESL/ENL teachers and two content area teachers will provide instruction. Students will be grouped heterogeneously according to grade. Teacher will then differentiate with small groups according to their NYSESLAT levels. We will utilize Progress New York, a standards-based program that provides practice with various question formats and add the speaking, listening, reading, and writing domains through close reading, questioning and discussion opportunities and short response questions with an emphasis on reading form information. There will be periodic assessments to determine student progress so we can better target students' needs. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III Professional Development program at P.S. 195 will provide diversity training, creating a positive environment for our ELL population and demonstrations of ENL methodologies. The professional development team will ensure that staff development is high quality and sustained throughout the academic year. Our school utilizes a two-cycle series to ensure continuous professional development coupled with inquiry. All PD provided will include an ENL component and there will be specific sessions focusing on best practices for ELLs. Professional Development will be provided to all teachers and staff members during PD sessions, lunch-and-learn, and planning meetings. During this series participants will: -engage in supporting student-to-student discourse to promote language development 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  Part C: Professional Development - develop pedagogical techniques to enhance thematic units of study in both reading and writing. The following professional development topics will be offered to support best practices for ELL methodologies: -ELL supports through guided reading: how to effectively conduct guided reading in classrooms while developing language acquisition -Rigor in mathematics. Differentiating for various learners, inclusive of ELLs and SWDs -Questioning and discussion: How to deepen conversations for ELLs -Eureka Math: How to use drills to push learning and differentiate for ELLs and SWDs Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: At P.S. 195 we understand that communication with parents plays a pivotal role in the home-school relationship. We offer translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. To sustain this commitment, translation will be provided in-house by bilingual school staff. Letters to be backpacked will be immediately translated. In addition, we will utilize the Datacation software, which provides high quality translation. With this software the school is able to transmit student data and information to parents instantly on their phones as well as through email and letters sent home. This software allows us to translate material into the parent's language of preference. Additionally, our school in collaboration with our co-located school has partnered with the Office of Adult and Continuing Education to provide ENL classes to families in the community. These classes will be held Monday - Wednesday 6 p.m. to 9 p.m. beginning September 2017 and will continue throughout the academic year 2018-2019. We will also offer workshops and trainings to parents. Our parent coordinator has partnered with Circle of Security international to provide early intervention to parents to facilitate a series of informational workshops. Workshop titles will include: -Understand their child’s emotional world by learning to read emotional needs -Support their child’s ability to successfully manage emotions -Enhance the development of their child's self esteem -Honor the innate wisdom and desire for their child to be secure Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff N/A and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Public School 195 Borough Bronx School Number 195 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Unal Karakas Coach Hannah Santiago ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Esther Martinez Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Vargas-Mendez Teacher/Subject Area Kimberly Morales Related-Service Provider Jessica Renovales Superintendent Rafaela Espinal Assistant Principal Xiomara Fernandez Coach Gina Baldeo School Counselor Cindy Billigmeier Parent Parent Parent Coordinator Kimberly Morales Field Support Center Staff Member iep facilitator Other (Name and Title) superintendent C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1013 Total number of ELLs 321 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 31.69% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2 3 1 1 4 1 K 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 0 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Currently our school uses Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment system to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. Once students have been assessed, that data (reading level) is entered into the STARS database. Additionally, teachers record F & P levels in our school-based data tracker on a Google Sheet on Google Drive, which has been programmed to analyze student data and monitor student progress. This data assists teachers and service providers in determining appropriate instructional resources and materials. Many of our ELLs are reading below grade level; therefore teachers utilize RtI to address those needs. Within each differentiated lesson teachers are required to incorporate all four domains (listening, speaking, writing, and reading). Additionally, our school will continue to utilize the iReady program. This tool allows teachers to conduct diagnostic assessments in reading and math. The program also allows teachers to identify student need by sub-level skill, and monitor progress achieving end-of-year targets. We have also purchased Learning A – Z 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  online resource for all classrooms, including licenses for ENL, AIS, and SETSS teachers, who provide service to our ELL and Special Ed population. This program allows teachers to attain meaningful and targeted scaffolded resources as additional support. This year we have also purchased Brain Pop, to include access to Brain Pop ESL and Brain Pop Espanol. Brain Pop is a resource that provides short animated movies for students in grades K-5 in science, social studies, English, mathematics, engineering and technology, health, and arts and music. Every classroom has a listening center (up to eight children) to provide learning opportunities to hear spoken English and to assist our ELLs with pronunciation and reading skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Each year two periodic assessments are administered to our ELL population. That data is used to identify the areas of deficiency within the four domains. This allows us to identify students who require additional support through increased small group instruction or academic intervention services. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We utilize NYC performance tasks in the beginning and end of the year to measure growth as well as the data from iReady assessments given three times a year to identify areas of need through out the school to make necessary adjustments in curriculum and practice. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered the instructional cabinet meet to review the data to include administration, instructional coaches, and the data specialist to analyze and identify growth and areas of continued need. This information is then presented to grade level teams who use the data to make instructional changes in curriculum and practice to address the identified areas. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The data collected is used to guide instruction for ELLs as recommended in the framework of RtI. In Tier 1 (core instruction) teachers analyze assessment data to determine performance levels and use this assessment data to plan instruction. Additionally, they differentiate instruction based on academic performance levels and the cultural background of the student. If a student has not made adequate progress in Tier 1, the teacher completes a referral sheet for Tier 2 services. The Academic Intervention Team then meets to review various forms of data (summative and formative assessments, anecdotal notes, teacher and parent input) to develop a plan to support the student in the areas that will enable the student to attain academic achievement level. If the team determines that the student needs Tier 2 intervention, then he/she will be picked up for out of classroom support. The AIS providers will use the Fountas and Pinnell Intervention Kits as well as teacher created materials with the student for a 30-minute session 3 to 4 times a week. If it was determined that the student did not make adequate progress in Tier 2 after a six (6) cycle, then the Academic Intervention Team will meet to review various forms of data (summative and formative assessments, anecdotal notes, teacher and parent input) to develop a plan for the student to receive Tier 3 services from the IEP Specialist designee at our school. If it is determined that a student does not make sufficient progress in Tier 3 after a six cycle, the IEP specialist will review the students lack of progress with the SIT Team who will make a determination of whether or not to continue intervention services or to refer the student to the SBST (School Base Support Team) for an evaluation to determine if the student requires special education services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The pattern that arises from NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results indicates that the vast majority of our students struggle with the Reading/Writing modalities. Therefore, ENL classes focus instructional time on building literacy skills through oral language. Explicit ENL strategies are taught and appropriate reading materials are provided with scaffolded response options to help students become more independent in reading and writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  Utilizing the data we have created an ENL program that is grade band specific to address the needs of students within the same grade and proficiency levels based on the data. ENL teachers support grades K, 1-2, 3-4 and 5 respectively used these findings in order to make adjustments to lesson that are co-facilitated with teachers in our push-in program. This information then allows us to examine our ENL program and student service minutes. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Based on parent choice, we offer ENL services using both a stand alone model and an integrated model. Dually certified teachers work in our self-contained ENL (the stand alone model). We have one of these self-contained classes at for grade 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. For our transitioning and expanding ELLs we provide the integrated model. One of our two ENL push in the classroom with a content area teacher as per the integrated model. Our special ed classes are provided with the integrated model as well in the event that the teacher is not dually certified. b. TBE program. If applicable. Based on parent choice, in the 2017-2018 school year we will offer Bilingual programs in first and fourth grade. We anticipate we will also offer bilingual education to our incoming kindergarten students. Teachers with bilingual extensions ensure that student receive the required minutes of Language Arts, inclusive of 1-2 Home Language Arts (depending on proficiency) and Bilingual instruction. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Current information from the RLAT is frequently used to update our Excel sheet for ELLs. Every ELLs required minutes have been recorded and together the ENL personnel have created schedule per administrative approval to ensure that all ELL are receiving the mandated minutes. Schedules are available on our Google Drive. These minutes are not included in any afterschool program or activities outside of school hours. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Licensed teachers implement ENL strategies aligned to the New York State common core standards to promote academic success. Academic instruction at P.S. 195 follows the workshop model across curricula, which is well adapted to the needs of our ELLs. It offers the opportunity for heterogeneous small-group instruction, modeling, and cooperative learning groups. We emphasize the development of oral language through explicit vocabulary exposure and a literacy rich environment. Emerging and Entering students are given opportunities to listen to the spoken language of English through group activity so they are exposed to a wide range of different language and literacy skills. Through comprehensible input, our ELLs are given the base for the information they need with selected key vocabulary to build their oral language development. Through context clues, building prior knowledge, cultural connections, visual interpretations, we build on their language and oral development so that they can attain the academic vocabulary within the content presented. Our ELLs are not limited only to content based vocabulary, it is integrated cross curricula, and used multiple ways over extended periods of time; This includes merging 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  science and social studies within the literacy blocks so that students have continuous and consistent exposure to the content, and vocabulary usage through reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Our ELLs are instructed through The Workshop Model. Ongoing adjustment of instruction is a key component of our instructional approaches. Teachers closely monitor student progress to modify instructional practices for all of our ELLs. Through this method, teachers are able to differentiate their lessons to meet the language needs of their ELLs. Through differentiation, teachers modify texts by selecting different levels of literature on similar content. Text complexity is scaffolded for our beginner to advanced ELLs. Teachers model oral reading, and students also participate in shared reading. Teachers also use close reading skills to facilitate in our ELLs accessing more challenging grade-level texts focusing on using strategies such as questioning and using evidence from the text. As in the aforementioned, academic vocabulary is attained through interactive learning practices. With SMART BOARD technology, we work with our ELL students to show them real-world information on the content they are learning about. We promote small research based projects (resources provided by the teacher) to combine oral, research, vocabulary and written exposure to the English language. Through these practices we are able to foster the development of the English language so that our ELLs can attain proficiency in English over a period of time. These instructional methods are sustained school-wide for our ELLs. Through these practices, we foster the development of the English language to promote proficiency in English. In mathematics, we provide our ELL students the learning opportunity for active participation. Through discussion and explaining our ELLs can understand mathematical problems before they are solved. Our ENL teachers provide real-world mathematical experiences so that ELLs can represent, reason, make conjectures, and construct arguments in math. Our ELLs have multiple opportunities to apply reading, written and the spoken application of the English language. ELLs participate in mathematical discussions as they learn English. Our ELLs have access to technology, teacher created materials, manipulatives, and supplemental resources to enhance their learning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? After students are assessed with NYSITELL, students whose home language is Spanish and do not attain “commanding level” on the NYSITELL are administered the Spanish LAB in order to determine language dominance for instructional planning in providing bilingual and ESL services. Supports and reassessment are periodically used to evaluate progress of language acquisition. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Each classroom teacher in our building has organized her/his classroom to facilitate differentiated instruction. Instructional plans for SIFE students include providing rigorous curriculum with technological support, intensive academic literacy instruction in the student’s first language (L1) and second language (L2) with the use of word for word glossaries and when possible direct translation. SIFE students are also provided intensive ENL instruction is provided. Additionally, teachers of ELLs are provided with various professional development opportunities.ENL licensed teachers provide ENL services to our special education students who are in ICT classes and 12:1:1 classes. ELLs with IEPs are most often in self-contained ENL classrooms. ENL classroom teachers are responsible for ENL content area instruction, which is delivered 3 times a week for social studies and twice a week for science. At least ten of our teachers are fluent Spanish speakers and can assist children with translation and additional native language support. In order to differentiate instruction for ELL students, we provide Academic Intervention Services for ELL newcomers as well as those with IEPs or those at risk of promotion. In addition, our SETTS teacher pushes into ENL classrooms to assist students with IEPs. Newcomer ELLs are provided with individual and small group instruction time when necessary for a smooth transition into their classroom environment. ELLs with 4-6 years of service are identified by the ENL coordinator and receives instruction in their classroom or push-in services when appropriate. Our long-term ELLs do receive Academic Intervention services when appropriate . This allows the AIS teacher to focus on skill and monitor individual progress more closely. Also the smaller group setting facilitates more active participation and more oral language development for the ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  Former ELLs are group in classes serviced by a push-in ENL teacher (the Integrated model). The appropriate amount a ENL support can then be provided to those ELLs based on classwork and classroom performance.All ELLs and former ELLs (going back two years) receive appropriate testing accommodations. Once students are identified as ELLs they are flagged for an extended time allocation on all state test. Our test coordinator works together with the ENL personnel to determine a test location and proctor to honor the time extension. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our teachers of ELL-SWDs follow the school-wide ELL instructional approaches and methodologies. We currently utilize Teacher's College Reading and Writing for English Language Arts instruction with a workshop model approach differentiating for ELLs and SWD students by utilizing resources designed to address their specific needs. The materials include oral language, word study, leveled readers for guided reading and picture cards as appropriate by grade.Include information that details how materials are grade- and age-appropriate. We are also utilizing iReady, Learning A-Z and myON for differentiated reading and interest allowing for independent reading.We utilize academic instructional strategies such as:• Metacognitive Development: Providing students with skills and vocabulary to talk about their learning such as self-assessments, note taking and studying techniques, and vocabulary assignments • Bridging: Building on previous knowledge and establishing a link between the students and the material for example: think-pair-share, quick-writes, and anticipatory charts• Schema-Building: Helping students see the relationships between various concepts with skills such as compare and contrast, jigsaw learning, peer teaching, and projects• Contextualization: Familiarizes unknown concepts through direct experience for example demonstrations, media, manipulatives, repetition, and local opportunities• Text Representation: Inviting students to extend their understandings of text and apply them in a new way through drawings, posters, videos, and games• Modeling: Speaking slowly and clearly, modeling the language you want students to use, and providing samples of student work.To ensure that ELL-SWDs receive all services on their IEPs our IEP Facilitator works in conjunction with service providers to create schedules that allow for push-in/pull out services, so that students receive mandates that are both on their IEP and aligned with their ELL needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? By utilizing parallel scheduling we ensure instruction in the same content area happens during the same periods for a grade, allowing for students to have access to all content areas when they are in another setting for that period. We provide an extra professional planning period each wee to facilitate with collaborative planning and sharing of best practice in order to made accommodations and ensure embedded differentiation and supports for all students, but particularly for ELLs and SWDs. Vertical teams also meet regularly to facilitate planning for all students. All students participate in the wide variety of classes we provide including music, art, drama and physical education. Collaborative groups are set up in the classrooms so that student can develop a strong academic working environment with their peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. School day intervention programs include services provided by an AIS teacher, utilizing Fountas & Pinnel Intervention kits and teacher created materials. As stated previously, we will integrate iReady, myON, and Learning A - Z as an additional resource. To continue our intervention services we identify students who are performing below grade level based on running records and math assessments as well as formal and informal assessments. These results assist in identifying students that require supplemental support. We offer an intervention program throughout the year. This program is a weekday program taught by ENL teachers who are able to provide ELLs with appropriate scaffolds. We utilize materials specifically tailored to immerse our ELL students in the four domains of the English language. We continue this support for our ELLs with an afterschool program, and we also extend these programs into the summer for year-round intervention to our ELLS, SWD ELLs, IEP, and mainstream students. Our intervention programs are tailored to meet the needs of our beginner, intermediate, and advanced ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  At this time we will continue to offer the aforementioned programs allow for growth and consistency. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have access to all school programs and receive equal access to art, dance, gym, trips, school events, and extra-curricula activities. We offer afterschool and Saturday program for all of our ELLs throughout the school year. The program will target all ELLs in grades 1-5, specifically targeting students who did not score Commanding in the LAB-R or NYSESLAT. It will also provide additional instructional opportunities for ELLs who are at risk, or are potential long-term ELLs not meeting the mandated improvement; nor have acquired language proficiency. Educational activities will include the use of Literacy and Mathematics. The program will include an oral language development component, and extensive writing activities to improve comprehension and writing skills. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All Classrooms have Smart Boards, leveled classroom libraries, and bilingual dictionaries. The ENL programs we work with have book sets in several genres at each level. All ENL classrooms are supplied with Level libraries purchased through Attanasio and Associates. Our school provides technological supports our ELLs with myON, iReady, Brain Pop and Learning A - Z, and the Go Math! Online component. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Over ten of our teachers are bilingual in Spanish and one speaks French. They provide essential language support when necessary including translation and scaffolded support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services a resources provided are grade appropriate. All ELLs have access to the resources that are provided for other classrooms within their grade level. Through differentiation, ESL teachers and ESL push-in teachers provide appropriate resources and teacher created materials according to proficiency level of their students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All Classrooms have Smart Boards, leveled classroom libraries, and bilingual dictionaries. The ENL programs we work with have book sets in several genres at each level. All ENL classrooms are supplied with Level libraries from Rigby’s On Our Way to English. Our school provides technological supports our ELLs with myON, iReady, Brain Pop and Learning A - Z, and the Go Math! Online component. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At spring pre-registration workshops staff reaches out to parents to provide details about the parent choice process and the various option available to them. Bilingual office staff is present to assist with this process. During the year the parents of newly enrolled students meet with an ENL provider via translation to ensure a smooth transition to our school. The students may have some initial individualized instruction to support their adjustment to the classroom. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time we do not offer language electives to our elementary ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All staff, which includes but is not limited to general education, special education, and ELL teachers, as well as assistant principal, paraprofessionals at PS 195 attend professional development sessions catered to ENL matters. Teachers and paraprofessionals are also sent to attend these professional development workshops so they can turn-key the information to their colleagues. In addition to the professional development we offer our teachers, we plan to provide all ELL staff with a professional development series catered to ENL methodologies. This professional development takes place on Mondays. We also supplement our professional development with lunch and learns catered to current ELL topics in the field of education. Through collaboration, our ENL coordinator is available to work with, support, and provide resources to our ENL teachers on a per-needed basis. With the support of Ms. Cindy Billigmeier, our ELL staff is supported with important information related to middle school application process and transition. Ms. Billigmeier and the ENL coordinator also serve as liaisons between parents and teachers to answer any questions related to this period of time. In collaboration with classroom teachers, the ENL coordinator provides an informational session with ENL parents to provide resources, and answer any questions related to this matter. We provide our teachers with a certificate of completion once they have attended the required hours of professional development for ELL training. Professional Development program at P.S. 195 will provide diversity training and knowledge of ENL methodologies, as well as explore the newest approaches to staff members in order to create a positive environment for our ELL population. It will provide high quality, sustained staff development. Through our professional development teachers of ELLs will engage in ways to develop student-to-student discourse to promote language development, develop pedagogical moves that support students co-creating disciplinary knowledge and develop implications for refining curriculum and lesson plans. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In collaboration with Ms. Cindy Billigmeier, the ENL Coordinator plans for an informational series for teachers to support ELLs with Q&A sessions for our students and parents. ELL teachers participate in professional development series catered to implement strategic elements of the middle school expectations with their instruction and daily routine. Within the classroom setting, ELLs bound for middle school, develop independent reading and math skills through rigorous tasks planned to promote higher-order thinking and reasoning. Through our afterschool program, ELLs are also exposed to a program schedule of their choice. Through this option, ELLs are prepared to transition from classroom to classroom while developing the independent skills required of them in middle school. Staff are also trained to develop scaffolded and rigorous writing tasks aligned to CCLS that our ELL students will be exposed to in middle school. Our PD Plan for the 2017-2018 school year will allot for two ENL professional development sessions a month. This will meet the mandate for 50% of our professional development plan to cater to teachers of ELLs, and 15% of PD for all teachers. In conjunction to this, teachers of ELLs will attend outside professional development dedicated to ELL matters. All agendas, sign-in sheets, and resources from each PD are filed in P.S. 195's Professional Development binder. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to providing information to families concerning the ELL program selection process, we offer parents of our English Language Learners multiple opportunities throughout the school year to support their children's academic needs through parent workshops. We offer parent surveys to inquire about what kind of support ELL parents would like to see in our school. The ENL coordinator also works with teachers to provide parents with educational workshops specific to the curricula needs of their child. Adult ENL class is offered through the Office of Adult and Continuing Education Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday 6 p.m-9 p.m.. The main focus is developing English spoken language skills, literacy, and vocabulary based on materials provided by OACE, to include Future Levels 1-5. Active participation is encourage and parents are provided with a comfortable environment and multiple opportunities to practice and improve their speaking skills in English and to give them a better idea of how English language material is being presented to their children. To supplement the ELL workshops, ELL parents are invited to attend the parent association meetings held monthly. In collaboration with community organizations, ELL parents are offered health and nutrition workshops, anti-bullying courses, and a variety of other topics. The ENL coordinator is available to offer translation services. Parents are invited to celebrate and participate in school-wide events such as Movie Night, Ballroom Dancing, Gymnastics performances, Cup Stacking Competitions, Drama productions, Concerts, etc. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We invite and include all of our ELL parents/guardians to all of our school functions. Parent/guardians are invited to participate in pep rallies, fun-runs, family nights, math nights, literacy nights, read to your child in class events, family celebratory events in the classroom, and instructional visits as well. All of these events are translated to meet the needs of our secondary dominant language of Spanish. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. In addition to the above written support services for ELL parents and ELL students, we provide opportunities for ELL parents to have access to the academic progress of their child 5 times out of the school year through progress reports (3 times) and report cards (2 times). We also provide our ELL parents with informational workshops to assist them with access to NYC DOE ELL resources. ELL parents are provided with NYSESLAT scores and a workshop is provided to explain the modalities. As written before, parents are also trained and supported with educational resources prior to the NYSESLAT. We are partnering closely with our parents to expose them to our instructional routines during the school day. Parents will be allowed to visit their child's classroom during the school day to strengthen our parent engagement and motivate student achievement. The ENL coordinator is available to meet with ELL parents and offer individualized support. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Unal Karakas, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 75  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 195 School DBN: 12X195 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Unal Karakas Title Principal Xiomara Fernandez Assistant Principal Kimberly Morales Parent Coordinator Esther Martinez ENL/Bilingual Teacher na Parent Elizabeth Vargas-Mendez Teacher/Subject Area na Gina Baldeo Hannah Santiago Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Cindy Billigmeier School Counselor Rafaela Epinal NA NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/24/17 06/24/17 06/24/17 06/24/17 06/24/17 06/24/17 06/24/17 06/24/17 06/24/17 06/24/17 06/24/17 NA NA NA NA 2018-19 SCEP-FF 76  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12x195 School Name: P.S. 195 Superintendent: Rafaela Espinal The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Xiomara Andrew Fernandez Steinkuehler Assistant Principal ENL Teacher yes yes yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication we utilize Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), Student Emergency Contact (Blue) cards, RPOB ATS report, and parent orientation forms, which include face-to-face interviews. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 77  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral AKAN BENGALI FRENCH FULANI ENGLISH ROMANIAN SPANISH WOLOF 2 4 2 8 510 2 766 1 0.15 0.31 0.15 .062 39.38 0.15 59.15 0.08 2 3 2 8 512 2 765 1 0.15 0.23 0.15 0.62 39.54 0.15 59.07 0.08 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent handbook September Monthly calendars September – June Notices and Announcements September – June Parent-teacher conferences, open-house, school events September – June Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Over the summer the parent handbook is updated and translated by a designated bilingual staff member. Each month the calendar is translated by a designated bilingual office staff member. Each month the calendar is translated by a designated bilingual office staff member. We will assist parent in connecting with over the phone interpretation for languages not covered by staff. Flyers and documents will be read to families that are unable to read English. We will utilize bilingual staff to translate in Spanish and encourage students to invite family members that can translate for their family 2018-19 SCEP-FF 78  Letters from teachers and administration September – June during meetings. When these options are not available we will call the Over the phone translation unit to translate meetings. Letters sent to parents are translated by a designated bilingual staff member or administrator as needed (daily, weekly, monthly) 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Open house September 17; May 15 Parent teacher conferences November 14-15; March 13-14 Parent Involvement Tuesdays; Parent Association meetings; Parent Involvement Tuesdays September – June Graduation/Stepping-up celebrations. June provide interpretation service(s)? We will utilize bilingual staff to translate in Spanish and encourage students to invite family members that can translate for their family during meetings. When these options are not available we will call the Over the phone translation unit to translate meetings. We will utilize bilingual staff to translate in Spanish and encourage students to invite family members that can translate for their family during meetings. When these options are not available we will call the Over the phone translation unit to translate meetings. We will utilize bilingual staff to translate in Spanish and encourage students to invite family members that can translate for their family during meetings. When these options are not available we will call the Over the phone translation unit to translate meetings. We will utilize bilingual staff to translate in Spanish and encourage students to invite family members that can translate for their family during meetings. When these options are not available we will call the Over the phone translation unit to translate meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 79  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency we will broadcast a message via School Messenger in both English and Spanish. If time allows we will also send out communication via paper notices with students and posted in both English and Spanish as well. In the event that we do not have staff who speak a language other than English or Spanish we will continue to utilize over-the-phone interpretation services provided at no cost to the parent or the school and is available 24 hours, 7 days a week. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Reference to Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 is included in our staff handbook, along with our goal to provide all parents and families with translation services to ensure clear and accurate information. We also periodically remind staff in meetings and via email to utilize translation services when necessary. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In our main office as well in the main corridor we have the Language Identification Guide to assist in identifying the primary language of limited-English parents. We also have the Multilingual Welcome Poster in our main corridor, which is visible to all visitors upon entry. During registration parents are provided with information regarding translation and services available to facilitate in communicating in their preferred language to include in-house translation and/or over-the-phone translation services. Translation is provided in-house by bilingual school staff. Written communication is translated by designated staff members, Carmen Rivera, Elizabeth-Vargas-Mendez, and Xiomara Fernandez. Additionally, we will continue to utilize IOEducation (formally Datacation) software, which provides high quality translation. With this software the school is able to transmit student data and information instantly on their phones as well as through email and letters sent home. This software allows us to translate materials into the parent preferred language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 80  Parent surveys done online and on paper, verbal and written feedback after workshops and events, letters sent home and collected/reviewed. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 81 
