2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 12X196 P.S. 196 Principal: LIZZETTE GRACIANI 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 196x The Literacy & Arts Academy 12X196 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 321200010196 Pre-K – 5 1250 Ward Avenue 718 328 7187 School Number (DBN): 718 861 8701 Fax: Lizzette Graciani LGraciani@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Lizzette Graciani Sharon Hamiliton Catherine Rivera Cynthia Diaz Nancy Ugsina N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 12 Ms. JaqulineRosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Road, Bronx, NY 10460 Superintendent’s Office Address: jrosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 328 2310 Phone Number: 718-542-7736 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Jose Ruiz FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx NY 10462 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 828 7776 Phone Number: 718 828 3113 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lizzette Graciani Sharon Hamilton Catherine Rivera IvettePando n/a n/a n/a Esperanza Silvas Rosa Hernandez Josephine Sims *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) NakebaBrown Cynthia Diaz Francia DeLeon Betty Becerril Christina Rodriguez Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher/ Chairperson Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Based on the belief that many students may not shine in one discipline but may very well excel in another our school motto is “ Every child has a point of entry to success ”. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Literacy & Arts Academy resides in a shared space - we are fond of saying, “One educational community, . . . two unique schools!" On that note, what makes our school unique began with the conception of our name. Because we believe that every child has a point of entry to success, we renamed our school, The Literacy & Arts Academy. We pride ourselves on enriching the lives of our students by immersing them in the academics as well as the arts. In line with the Framework for Great Schools in the area of Supportive Environment, we have invested in such partnerships as Studio in a School, Dancing Classrooms, Inside Broadway, Educational Alchemy and have hired a full time music and art teacher. It is our mission, to build a community of lifelong, well-rounded learners who are cognitively aware of their stake hold in our school community and the world at large. Although we are comprised of a diverse population of 18% Black, 77% Hispanic, 1% White, 1% Asian and 3% other students, within these populations, there are a barrage of various countries, regions and cultural experiences, that students arrive at our doorstep possessing. With this in mind, we encourage and welcome parents into the school community to not only benefit our students, but also to abreast them of the services we provide and or to inform them of the services that are available to them via outside agencies. Hence, as educators, we are keenly aware that collaboration between school, home and the formation of strong partnerships are essential to educating the whole child and prepare them to be college and career ready individuals. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our newly arrived English Language Learners comprise 31% of our student population. Their main needs are the lack of literacy in their home language, and poor school background, although very few of our students are classified as SIFE. Getting this population of students acclimated to their new surroundings and, of course, immersing them in the English language are of great importance to their parents and our school community. Therefore, we have maintained an ENL Self-contained class in every grade following the model of sheltered instruction. In addition, we have opened a Transitional bilingual program in grades K-2 as per parental choice. We have established an ENL team that services students in the overflow and self-contained special ed classes with the push in pull out model as per Part 154, where ENL and ELA are integrated. For 2018-2019, we will decrease the percentage of SWDs performing at a level 1 on NYS ELA assessment from 75% to 69% or less, through the improved identification and implementation of specially designed instruction to access grade level standard for all SWDs. Given the various needs of students with disabilities in order to close the achievement, students will need SDI in content, methodology, delivery of instruction. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to our data, attendance in parent engagement activities has increased. As aligned to the Framework for Great Schools in the area of Strong Family-Community Ties we will facilitate greater parent involvement and have decided to utilize the Tuesday Parent Meetings to target parents who traditionally do not attend our meetings. Using the data from our grade inquiry meetings, 10 parents per class and their children will be invited to attend a Student Led Strategy session facilitated by their teacher. Students will receive formative feedback pertaining to one area in which they are struggling and will be provided tools to aid them in making modifications. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X196 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 934 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 70 69 39 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 73 68 39 39 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 88.8% % Reduced Lunch 32.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.6% 80.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.26 0% 38% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 25.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 67% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 48 49 39 93.0% 0.3% 18.3% 15.2% 1.4% 2.6% 6 9% 7.6 21.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school community knows that a solid math and ELA foundation is critical to student success. In order to demonstrate proficiency on the State test, students need to be meeting grade-level expectations based on assessments, exit slips, and performance tasks. Our instructional focus, Designing Coherent Instruction was developed in response to our school-wide data and our quality review feedback. Our instructional focus aligns with this goal and emphasizes planning learning activities designed to engage students and advance their knowledge of the content. Some of the learning activities that will be implemented are Word Problem Days, fluency activities including math minute, math message to reinforce past concepts, and doubling the math period twice a week starting from the beginning of the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 5% increase in Math and ELA proficiency as measured by the NYS exam. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan 5. -Research-based instructional programs, professional Grades 3-5 development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Progress Monitoring Coaches and Teachers -Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g. coverage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). -Engaging families and supporting their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) in order to support their children at home. Educators will review the New York State Assessments in Mathematics and English Language Arts in order to identify student performance levels and review skills analysis to target instruction and identify areas of concern and pushables. Professional development will be provided throughout the school year on the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) in Math and ELA. September 2018 January 2019 June 2019 Every 6 weeks September 2018 (June Instructional Excel)-June 2019 All Grades Grades 3-5 Coaches and Teachers Administration, Coaches, Teachers Administration, Coaches, Teachers All Grades and staff members September 2018 -June 2019 Teachers will host parent workshops on Tuesday afternoons that focus on the NGLS and strategies to assist all students in Math and ELA. AIS services will be provided by SMARTSTART. These students are selected by hold over status, item skills analysis, and an Individual Place Assessment . Maintain ongoing classroom observations using the Danielson framework both formal and informal that result in meaningful conversations regarding teacher pedagogy. Implement daily math fluency routines including cyclical learning (problem of the day) and implement Word Problem Work. In ELA partner reading, Wilson Fundations,Sound Sensible (Grades K), 5 days a week Daily 2018-19 CEP 13  S.P.I.R.E. (Grades 1-5) , Reading Recovery (1st Grade), and Reading Rescue. Doubling the math period twice a week starting from the beginning of the year Teachers will utilize the Teachers College Writing Units of Study to plan for writing instruction. Writing instruction will be delivered in both whole group and small group settings according to NGLS to ensure differentiation, SDI, and academic rigor. Regular writing celebrations will foster a motivation and purpose for writing and also promote the writing process with our families. Teachers in grades K-5 will use a shared writing approach as a means of differentiation to model the strategies that good writers in several genres. 2x a Day 2018-19 CEP 14  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will host parent workshops on Tuesday afternoons that focus on the NGLS and strategies to assist all students in Mathematics and ELA. Teachers will share student data with families to support implementing strategies at home that will improve their math and ELA skills. Family Fun Activities: Math Family Night 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The goal of 2% will be achieved with the appropriate funding Title 1 funds, Curriculum & Staff (Allocated $5,000) to pay for the D12 NTC initiative mentors (2), the ELA/ Math Coach's salary and to have an After School per session activities targeting instruction in mathematics. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -Progress Monitoring for math is based on Go Math unit assessments, exit slips, Rally Results, and performance tasks. The impact of this work is measured via monitoring progressions of the Rally which is given in January. We analyze the results of the data and make adjustments accordingly to improve student success. -Principal, Assistant Principals and the Professional Development Team meet bi-weekly to develop differentiated professional development sessions and sessions to analyze student work. Principal and APs develops and sustains a culture of adult learning, reflections, and inquiry. Teachers will administer F&P assessments throughout the year. Teachers will monitor student progress in a variety of ways, including but not limited to conferences, guided reading level up, and strategy lessons. K-2 will be implementing Wilson Fundations for the purpose of building sound recognition, decoding and endcoding, fluency, and comprehension. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Rally (Mock NYS Mathematics Exam - January 2019)  Modified Go Math Unit Assessments  Exit Slips  Unit Performance Tasks In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. The school's strengths relative to the Framework element include as follows: Based on the Quality Review data the school is a safe and inclusive environment that supports social-emotional growth with a score of 3.50. The Quality Review also indicated that high expectations are clearly communicated to students and staff with a score of 3.50. According to the NYC School Survey from 2017-2018, 87% of teachers say that adults at their school teach critical thinking skills to students (Q21c). The NYC School Survey also shows that 93% of pre-k through 5 teachers say that students are safe in their class(es) (Q25d). 2. Priority needs include: According to the NYC School Survey from 2017-2018, 74 % of teachers who teach students in grades pre-k through 5 agreed or strongly agreed that discipline is applied to students fairly in their school. (Q24) 58% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. (Q21f) 41% of pre-k through 5 teachers say that students try hard to get good grades. (Q24d) 48% of teachers say that students behave well in class even when the teacher isn't watching. (Q20i) 3. The policies, practices, and structures in place to ensure we are supporting the whole child include use of PBIS, Respect for All, NYPD Community Affairs Outreach Youth Development. The school is implementing Restorative Circles for lower grades and Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS). Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 17  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will establish a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers as measured by the NYC School Survey for 2018-19 which will result in a 5% increase in student outcomes on the State ELA and Math exams. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). - 30% of staff will be Restorative Circles trained -20% of the staff will be TCIS trained Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Crisis Team members, K-5 teachers 10% by November Administration, K-5 Teachers 20% by January Crisis Team, Special Ed Teachers, 1:1 Para 30% by June 5% by November 15% by January Administration, Crisis team, Special ed teachers, 1:1 para -100% of the staff will be trained in PBIS by June 2019 All Staff -100% of the staff will be trained in Respect for All -attending behavior management professional learning provided by OSYD Behavior All Staff New Teacher 20% by June 40% by November All Staff 80%by January 100% by June 100% by October 31st All Staff 2018-19 CEP 19  3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 20  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage parents and families to enhance their understanding and how they can contribute to a Supportive Environment that will directly impact student progress and achievement. The following supports are implemented to achieve this goal: -Agenda books (Sept- June) -Workshops provided by CBO and OSYD (Monthly) -Mental health clinics (2x a year) -Tuesday Parent Engagement (Sept-June) -Coffee with principal (Monthly) -Testing Workshop (March) -SOTM (Monthly) -Middle School Readiness (April-June) -Math Family Night (May) -Author's and Artist Night (June) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize funds to establish partnerships with community based organizations who have a background in using strategies for monitoring and developing positive behaviors to support our school community. We will also use funds to support our PBIS team in strengthening and enhancing our school-based interventions with the purpose of creating a supportive environment. Funds will be used to purchase PBIS instructional resources for promoting character education. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a decrease in the number of Level 3 and Level 4 behavior infractions, compared to the 2017- 2018 results in OORS. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The PBIS team will meet to analyze student's behavior and provide teachers and parents with behavior intervention support. The PBIS team will review Teacher Anecdotal Notes, number of classroom removals, and the Online Occurrence Report System (OORS) to measure the student's progress and the reduction of the number of incidents . Parents conferences will be held to discuss noticeable trends. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The needs assessment is based on the NY State ELA exam results. All All 1 2 3 4 2017 3 & 4 3&4 3 &4 2018 2018 3&4 Change 2017 37% 35% 25% 3% 16.7% 27.5% 37% 37% 20% 6% 21.1% 26.2% +10.8% +5.1% 62% 16% 16% 6% 15.6% 18% 22.1% 25.2% +6.5% Grade ELA Results 3rd Grade 4th Grade 5TH Grade Grade Math Results 1 2 3 4 2017 All 2018 3&4 All 3&4 Change 3 &4 3 & 4 2018 2017 37% 35% 22% 6% 19.4% 28.5% + 9.1% 45% 31% 16% 8% 15.1% 24.5% + 9.4% 69% 19% 6% 6% 8.3% 14.7% 12% 21.6% + 3.7% 3rd Grade 4th Grade 5TH Grade Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 23  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% will indicate that meeting in teacher teams at least once a week supports them in providing rigorous instruction as evidence by a 5% increase in reading and writing proficiency as measured by the NY State ELA exam. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams will meet once a week to analyze student work and plan for next steps in order to incorporate research based instructional strategies to support student growth. All teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 administration, coaches, teachers Vertical teams meet once a month (Impact Team) to plan across grade levels and identify gaps within the curriculum. All teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 administration, coaches, teachers Inter-visitations within model classrooms in order to support consistency across grade levels and teacher pedagogy. All teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 administration, coaches, teachers Administration and coaches will observe teacher practices together to norm best practices and provide teachers with additional support within the Danielson Framework 3D. Sept 2018- administration, coaches, teachers All teachers June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents were provided the NYC Roadmap during Open House, which is an outline of the grade level expectations. Parents are also invited on Tuesday during Parent Engagement Time to discuss student needs and growth. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The appropriate funding to achieve this goal and assist with the following as noted: 1. Scheduling of common grade meetings (2-3 times a week) 2. Impact team will meet once a month. 2018-19 CEP 25  3. Utilize substitute teachers to cover classes for inter-visitations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Data for the Danielson Framework as measured in Advance 2. Student conferences 3. F&P 4. Guiding reading leveling up 5. Strategy groups Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  TC Writing Pre-Assessment and Post Assessment Units Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: According to the NYC Survey, 62% of the teachers agreed and strongly agreed when discussing their professional experiences of the year. They agree and strongly agreed that: 1. The professional learning had," been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short-term and unrelated." 2. The professional learning, "included enough time to think carefully about, try and evaluate new ideas." 3. The professional learning, " included opportunities to work productively with colleagues in my school." 4. The professional learning, "included opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools." Weakness: According to the 2016-2017 NYC Survey, 70% of the teachers indicated that there is no collaboration within a professional culture of learning of respect, when specially answering the following question: "Do teachers feel that the school fosters a commitment to student success, school improvement, and continuous professional learning within a culture of respect?" Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of teachers will respond positively to the question, “Do teachers feel that the principal is an effective manager who makes the school run smoothly?" as measured by the NYC survey. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? -Create a Professional Learning Team to design and implement on-going sessions based on instructional rounds using data and clearly communicating the need of the targeted goal. All teachers Sept-June School leaders, grade teams and coaches - Teachers will be organized into differentiated PLT's to conduct specific work based on ADVANCE data and Growth Explorer. All staff members will use Google Docs and One Drive to share curriculum, design units as well as increase school communication through Google calendar. All Staff Members September-June School Leaders Coaches Teachers and support staff members School Leaders, Support Staff Members and all staff members To build trust amongst teachers and school leaders, opportunities for inter-visitations vertically and horizontally will be scheduled by building leaders and coaches. School Leaders, Grade Leads September- June Impact Team (including grade leads, lead core curriculum teachers, coaches, and administrators) meets bi-weekly to look at the school wide data to take an inquiry stance to address teacher concerns and school issues to create a supportive environment. All members of our school community must utilize PBIS to create a positive and supportive educational environment for achieving successful student outcomes. Parents, Guardians and Staff October - June Monthly PTA meetings Parent Coordinator, Learning Leaders, School Leaders and all pedagogical staff SLT 2018-19 CEP 28  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through the PTA, SLT and IMPACT team meetings, we will build a bridge of cohesiveness in which teachers and parents meet in small groups to discuss curriculum, culture and community. Some meetings will take place in the early morning, prior to the start of school. While other meetings will take place during the school day to accommodate a wide range of needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I Funds will be set aside for professional development, teacher inter- visitation and outside resources , professional team building activities and professional development in the area of creating a supportive environment of trust. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -Survey Monkey will be administered three times a year. -Four Instructional Rounds: September 12-October 31 November 1-December 21 January 2- March 15 March 18- May 31 -Professional Learning Communities will be formed September 2018. PLC sessions will focus on PLC protocols of instruction of best practices. -After Instructional Round 2 school leaders will survey the staff in order to gather data to better support PLC -By November 13, 2018 at least 25% of teachers have engaged in classroom inter-visitations/learning walks at least once. -By October 1, 2018 100% of teachers have engaged in collaboration activities such as team meetings, weekly Monday's PLC 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -A survey will be administered three times duplicating the questions from the NYC Survey to measure the specific areas that have been identified as on the 2017-2018 NYC survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey 61% of families say they had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 4% in the area of Parent Involvement in School, specifically in the area of parent volunteering time to support the scholars as measured by the NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The parent coordinator will set-up a table at the main entrance of the school. The table will have fliers and handouts that communicate the following; school-wide monthly calendar for families with events and workshops taking place at the school, NYC Department of Education Calendar, lunch and breakfast menus for their child, contact information and ongoing activities from local Community Based Organizations, school district family-child activities, and information for parents to support their child’s academic needs at home. Representatives from local CBOs will be invited to set-up an information table in addition to the Parent Coordinator’s table. Fliers and handouts will be translated for parents. Progress: The parent coordinator has collaborated with the other school in our building and provided a permanent information board in the main lobby. Information is updated monthly. In addition, Bronx Lebanon Hospital has been an active CBO in our school providing workshops, handouts, and assistance to families. The school will organize learning walks and invite parents to visit various classrooms on their child's grade in order to foster strong family ties and transparency into academic rigor. The parent coordinator/ social worker/ guidance counselor will reach out to various CBOs to facilitate a partnership to support parent engagement and foster strong family ties. Each grade team will conduct monthly Parent Academic Workshops. Grade level teams will analyze trends based on inquiry work and individual meetings and facilitate parent workshops based on these findings. The team will demonstrate and review the curriculum, standards, and tasks students have been engaged in the classroom. Parents will have an opportunity to ask questions, engage in similar activities their child engages in the classroom, and participate in a make-and-take activity to Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families and students of the school community Sept- Open House Parent Coordinator Administration Nov – P/T Conferences March - P/T Conferences May 17, 2019 Author and Artist Night All Parents Oct-June As needed Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker PK-5 teachers Last Tuesday of the Month Classroom Teachers Administration Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 32  follow-up at home. The parent coordinator will attend the workshop and translate all information shared out to the families. Families of the school community Classroom teachers will invite parents to the classroom to engage in monthly family-child activities and TC Writing Publishing celebrations. For example, classroom helper, secret reader, Read with My Child, etc. PK- 5 Teachers Families of the school community Last Friday of the Month Monthly student progress reports will be sent home each month presenting their child’s progress in both ELA and Mathematics. Testing Meeting with parents in both ELA and Math to prepare for the state exams. Progress: Progress reports are sent home after each unit chapter test, reading assessments (F&P), daily and monthly behavior progress reports. Parents have to sign off and schedule follow-up appointments with teachers. Students and Families of the school community 3rd Wednesday of each month Classroom Teachers Literacy and Math Coaches All parents Sept-Nov Data Specialist Administration Parent Coordinator Parents are invited to a one-to-one meeting with their child's classroom teachers to determine academic goals and discuss progress reports. Parents are invited one Tuesday a month for parents to review student progress reports. Five students' parents will be invited per month to discuss growth and any assistance needed. Nov-May Classroom Teachers As needed IEP Teacher Administration 2018-19 CEP 33  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. During Tuesday parent engagement time, teachers will reach out to parents inviting them to spend time in their child’s classroom and/or volunteer for any special events taking place in the classroom or school wide. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I Funds will be set aside for Professional Learning activities facilitated by Community Based Organizations as stated in the action plan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration and parent coordinator will design and conduct a survey that replicates the NYC Department of Education survey, specifically question 4a, under Parent Involvement in School. The survey will be administered to the parents twice in the school year. The survey will be in English and Spanish. Additionally, attendance at open house, parent-teacher conferences, parent workshops and meetings, and the frequency and amount of time spent volunteering in school-wide events, will be calculated to monitor and determine the percentage of parent participation. * Survey results are based on the following components:  Culture & Climate  Education  Family Engagement Parent workshops/ attendance 2018-19 CEP 34  Our goal is to hold workshops that will support parents in their efforts to become community volunteer members. This year parents will be invited to volunteer: -To work as a member of the office staff -Assist SLT -To work with the PTA to coordinate bake sales -To coordinate with the PTA to decorate the father daughter/mother son dances -They can coordinate with the math coach to organize and participate in math family night - They can help support the implementation of PBIS -They can volunteer for class trips Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC Department of Education Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) In grades 3-5, students who scored 1 on the ELA Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group & push in / pull out , Reduced class size, Differentiated Groupings These services will be provided during the school day as well as After-School Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Tier I: Wilson Fundations (k-2) Small Group/Guided Instruction (k-5) Strategy Lesson based on Item Skills Analysis A-Z Reading (k-5) Tier II: DIBELS Next Assessment Words Their Way (ENL Grades 1-5) (Grades K-5) Mind Play (2-5) Tier III: Sound Sensible (Kindergarten) Spire (SETSS & Grades 1-5) SmartStart(intenceInterventions for previously held over students 2018-19 CEP 36  Mathematics In grades 3-5, students who scored a 1 on the NYS Mathematics Exam Tier I Go Math (Exit Tickets as a means of progress monitoring towards the objective) -School Wide- Benchmarks (Math Reflex software Grades 2-5) -Fluency Assessments These services will be provided during the school day as well as during After-School Small group differentiated math instruction. Interventions that are geared towards specific mathematical concepts within the Go Math program. -Go Math Assessments Science Students in grades 3-5 Tier II Small group instruction based on data Tier III Engage NY These students will be mandated to attend After-School.Also Go Math, our school math program has built in intervention support. Amplified Science K-5 These students will be mandated to attend After-School with a focus on mathematics as the entry point to science Passport to Social Studies K-5 Social Studies Students in grades 3-5 Students will be exposed to Non-fictionreading materials throughout Teachers College Reading and Writing curriculum. Services will be provided by the school social worker and guidance counselor unless otherwise stated in their IEP. PBIS isdedicated to character development and social skills. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with IEPs that specifically state that they are to receive counseling. -OORS Reports, Teacher These services will be provided during the school day as well as during After-School and Saturday Academy These services will be provided during the school day as well as during After-School and Saturday Academy During the school day unless otherwise stated in their IEP Small group differentiated instruction. Small group differentiated instruction through content area literature As per their IEP, students will either receive one-to-one and,or small group counseling -Students at Risk 2018-19 CEP 37  Observations and Referrals 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) The current number of students in Temporary Housing is 153. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We have set aside the mandated $15,300 (Basic Emergency Supplies) for the students. These funds will be used to support our STH students and families by providing them with basic and or emergency supplies to meet not only the State’s challenging academic achievement standards, but also their basic needs. We will provide uniforms, coats, backpacks, school supplies etc. Our Guidance Team will provide on-site counseling services and make referrals to community based organizations as warranted. Parental engagement, involvement and outreach are also of concern,and workshops/activities will be conducted to address this issue. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to ensure that we hire HQT, we have formed partnerships with Lehman College, Fordham University, and Hunter College in which we are provided access to their most promising graduates. Also, we are firm believers in recommendations from Effective and Highly Effective staff members who refer professionals for various teaching positions. We have also used our BFSC as a source for recommendations. Retention has been a challenge being that so many of my teachers do not live in the 5 boroughs. For the purpose of retention, we make it a point to first attempt to hire from within as well as providing our Effective and Highly Effective staffers the opportunity to take leadership roles in that they are afforded opportunities to attend outside professional development and then turnkey that information to their colleagues. At Literacy & Arts Academy, we take great care in appointing teachers to leadership positions such as grade-lead, Data Team, SLT member and/or to the Professional Development Team. Teachers are also encouraged to submit requests for professional development that interests them and aligns to the curriculum that we are implementing during the course of the year and we also suggest PDs for our staffers to participate in via the BFSC, the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support and the United Federation of Teachers Teacher Center . When teachers participate in these off-site PDs, they then turnkey the information to their grade or school wide depending on the targeted audience. We are also working with the District and their support and are part of the NTC mentoring program to assist newly hired teachers in becoming highly qualified and maintaining their highly qualified status. The NTC mentoring program is pivotal and allows for the school to support our teachers with their effectiveness. As part of the NTC program each teacher is assigned a mentor so that they are provided support based on individual needs. This year teachers wanted to take the reins in developing the Positive Behavior Intervention Systems (PBIS). They requested meeting times so that they could vertically plan events across the grades to foster a deeper awareness of civic mindedness as well as bring awareness to the intrinsic behaviors that lead to College and Career Readiness. Several teachers signed up to share in the responsibility to take positions of leadership in launching and implementing this school wide initiative. We have found it necessary to have three full time coaches who support teacher development in TC Reading, Writing, Go Math and implementing the Next Generation Standards. We currently have two literacy coaches and one math coach. One literacy coach works with the Pre-K – 2nd grade students and teachers, while the other literacy coach works with the teachers and students in grades 3-5. We have one math coach on staff that also serves as our data 2018-19 CEP 41  specialist and she works with grades Pre-K – 5. Those who hold a coaching position are required to stay abreast to further their knowledge and expertise through literature, learning walks, inter-visitations to other schools as well as professional development during and off school hours. Coaches also highlight teachers who are experiencing success in a particular domain and work alongside them to develop a presentation to be delivered to their colleagues. - Assistant Principals are assigned to specific grades to zoom in on needs and keep communication open of clear expectations. -Common planning periods are built into every grade's schedule and flow of the day. This allows common time for teachers to plan together as well as for administration team to sit in on meetings. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The data from Advance is utilized to determine areas of strengths and challenges school-wide as well as per grade while distinguishing between areas of concern among seasoned teacher, versus less experienced teachers. In addition we use Survey Monkey to gather data and generate a needs assessment. Teachers are asked a series of questions to gauge what they believe their needs are at the start of the school year and this information is used prior to the first round of observations to plan a set of Professional Learning Series. The Cabinet and the PD team convene to set the structure for the first series of workshops. This may take the shape of a book club or a step-by-step presentation on how to implement a skill using various strategies to ensure the teacher’s understanding is on a solid foundation to then deliver lessons that enable students to meet the State Standards. My assistant principals and I not only set the criteria for the professional development that takes place within our building but also attend PDs outside of our building as well as during our personal time. This ensures that we are all responsible for keeping ourselves and our staff abreast of current pedagogically sound practices. As mentioned earlier, P.S. 196 is participating in the NTC Mentoring program which guides professional development on an individual basis. The data collected from observations to provide direct and personalized professional development with formative feedback. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Students will work in small groups and receive differentiated instruction based on their proficiency level. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). We are partnered with Fordham University's ENL program and our teachers work specifically with their coach to ensure that language objective are aligned to the CCLS. 2018-19 CEP 42  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The local CBOs have collaborated in scheduling orientation and tours of their future classroom. They also work with the Pre-K Family Worker and Parent Coordinator in order to prepare for the transition in to a DOE classroom setting. We also have parent orientation (Open House) in which we expose parent to the curriculum which includes strategies that they can utilize at home to reinforce any areas that the teachers deem necessary. Teachers of perspective students with disabilities are informed of any necessary changes they need to make to accommodate their incoming student and parents are abreast of the what systems we have in place to meet the needs of their child. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Professional Development Team, which consist of the administrators, coaches and four teachers discussed the various tools we use for assessment and create a yearlong testing calendar. As a school community our data consist of Fountas and Pinnell Running Record Assessment Kit since the community cited evidence that the F&P were more in line with the ELA State Exam. These assessments are in addition to the pre and post assessments that are created by teacher teams at the start of each unit 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5b Section 5b Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 851,597 69,711 2018-19 CEP 43  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 37,710 n/a 5,696,682 X X X Section 5b NA Section 5b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP 44  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school, PS 196, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [PS 196x] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City and State standards and assessments ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand 2018-19 CEP 46  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act 2018-19 CEP 47  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee ● hosting Family Activity Days ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) [PS 196x] ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 48  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Standards ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 49  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act. Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes) 2018-19 CEP 50  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions ● show respect for myself, other people and property ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully ● always try my best to learn 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 10 5 5 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Data Analysis: P.S. 196 has a population of 941 students of that 32.3 % are ENLs. The NYSESLAT for the current school year as most recent data will be considered for supplementary programming. As per the collected data, 3.8% of ELLs scored at the commanding level on the NYSESLAT 2017 and the highest concentration of commanding students is on 2nd, 3rd, and 4th grades. Ninety- percent of the English Language Learners that took the 2018 ELA tests scored at a level 1 or 2 or high 2. The common factors are that they are within the Newcomer group (within three years of service) and that they present language proficiency levels that range from emerging to transitioning. Other factors involved are the low reading levels of the target population, not being able to interpret instructional directions, lack of grade level and academic vocabulary and the difficulties to apply reading skills on higher level texts. New entrants also performed very low in the Math test in relation to their peers as they lacked basic Math, and comprehension skills in their home language. As per recent data, a group of transitioning students in grades 4th and 5th were stagnated in the reading and writing modalities. In addition, from the screening interviews performed to kindergarten registrants, and the data from the NYSITELL it could be observed that students need support in literacy as some are coming with poor literacy skills, and some have never been to school before. Moreover, Newcomers in 1stand 2nd grade have not made progress during their school year and need reinforcement in reading and writing.Description of program initiative:Based on the data reported above, P.S. 196 will host learning communities program with subdivisions: “Bright Start”,“Newcomer Academy”,” Creative Writing”, “ENL Enrichment Program” and “Empowering Readers”.Teaching teams will consist of an ENL certified teacher and a Common Branch teacher for every group that will work with students grouped according to their reading level and within the range of two contiguous grades besides their language proficiency level.The Language of Instruction: The instructional language for all programs will be English with Home Language support.Program Rationale: Empowering students with the tools to learn the language successfully through developing expertise in the four skills (listening, speaking, reading and writing).Home Language Support: Bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, electronic translation, buddy system and use of home language to clarify concepts.Record Keeping: Students attendance, program notification letters in their parents’ preferred language are kept by the coordinator in a file. Description: The program “Bright Start” is designed for grades Kinder and 1st to meet the specific needs of students in reading and writing. Students will be using Words their Way for ELLs curriculum for kindergarten and 1st grade which includes picture identification for vocabulary, interactive 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information writing and guided reading. At the same time “Newcomer Academy" will target Entering, Emerging and Transitioning students from 2nd to 5th grade. Instruction will focus on reading strategies in guided reading groups, word study, vocabulary practice, controlled writing techniques to improve writing performance and listening comprehension activities with a final product. Under the same subdivision, students that are under the same category will receive support in Math in their Home language as part of the program. This cohort of students will be under “Casa de Matemáticas”. The program "Creative Writing" will include students whose language proficiency are transitioning,expanding or commanding and instruction will consist of L+1 reading and writing activities to facilitate growth.Dates and Sessions: Wednesdays and Thursdays 2:25p.m.to 4:25 p.m. on November 7, 2018, to December 20, 2018.13 sessions “Bright Start” Group 1: 1 ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area, certified teacher Entering, emerging level 12 students from Kindergarten Group 2: 1 ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area, certified teacher Transitioning and Expanding level 12 students from Kindergarten Group 3: ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area certified teacher Entering, emerging and transitioning 12 students 1st grade “Casa de Matemáticas”Common Core with bilingual extension in Spanish teacher Entering, emerging level 12 students grades 3-4 “Casa de Matemáticas” 1 ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area, certified teacherEntering, emerging, transitioning level 12 students grades 4-5 “Newcomer Academy” Subdivisions: Group 1: 1 ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area, certified teacherEntering level 12 students grades 2-3 Emerging level 12 students grades 2-3Group 2: 1 ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area, certified teacherTransitioning level 24 students grades 2-3Group 3:1 ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area, certified teacher Entering level 12 students grades 4-5 Emerging level 12 students grades 4-5Group 4: 1 ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area, certified teacherTransitioning level 24 students grades 4-5 “Creative Writing”: 1 ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area, certified teacherExpanding: 12 students 4-5Commanding: 12 students 4-5Description:The same group of teachers will participate in the “ENL Enrichment Program” from January 9, 2019, to February 2019, servicing students under the following categories: Newcomers, Transitioning, and Expanding in grade bands from 2:25 p.m. to 4:25 p.m. for a total of 12 sessions. Students will be exposed to vocabulary, language lab, text comprehension strategies and will make use of controlled writing to improve their academic performance.Date and Sessions:Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:25 to 4:25 p.m. from January 10, 2019, to February 14, 2019.12 sessionsGroup 1: ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area certified teacherEntering/Emerging level 24 students grades 2-5Group 2: ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area certified teacher2nd Grade: Transitioning and Expanding 24 students.Group 3: ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area certified teacher Transitioning and Expanding 24 students from 3rd grade.Group 4: ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area certified teacherTransitioning and Expanding 24 students from 4th grade.Group 5: ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area certified teacher Transitioning and Expanding 24 students from 5th grade.“Empowering Readers”Description:The same group of teachers will participate in the following categories: Newcomers, Transitioning and Expanding in grade bands 2-5 from 2:25 p.m. to 4:25 p.m. for a total of 6 sessions. Students will be developing their reading skills learned during the year through the “National Geographic Reach Program “ for ENLs. This program reviews pre-taught content and prepare the student to read and write through vocabulary splash and language frames. Guided reading sessions will also be incorporated in these empowering blocks as well.Date and Sessions: Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:25 to 4:25 p.m. from May 29, 2019, to June 13, 2019.7 sessionsGroup 1: ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area certified 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information teacherEntering/Emerging level 24 students grades 2-5Group 2: ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area certified teacher2nd Grade: Transitioning and Expanding 24 students.Group 3: ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area certified teacherTransitioning and Expanding 24 students from 3rd grade.Group 4: ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area certified teacherTransitioning and Expanding 24 students from 4th grade.Group 5: ENL certified teacher/1 Content Area certified teacher Transitioning and Expanding 24 students from 5th grade. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The rationale for professional development:The school gives PD every Monday from 2:20 p.m. to 3:40 p.m. to all staff to meet the demands of Part 154 in preparation for the school year. Following those guidelines, 50% of the sessions dedicated to ENL instruction are for ENL teachers and 15% of general classroom teachers. Besides PD sessions, the school utilizes consultants, mentors, and reflective supervisor to enhance instruction performance.Facilitators’ Training: Presenters feed into other workshops given by the ENL Service Coordinator: Karyna Tejeda and the Compliance Specialist Wladimir Pierre on a monthly basis at the district level. In addition, Diane Howitt, the Regional Bilingual Network Specialist from Fordham University gives training to the facilitators once a month on compliance and instructional matters. This training is turned into Professional Development sessions for the staff servicing ENLs. Irma Marzan, an educational consultant will be hired through Fordham University to support the teachers in ENL differentiation.Record Keeping: Agendas and attendance sheets for ENL related PDs are kept by the coordinator in the file.Comprehensive Schedule: October 10th, 2018 through June 2019.Topics to be covered: Co-teaching methodology, Socio-Emotional Aspects of Language Learning, Entering and Exiting the ENL Program, Collaborative Teaching, Planning and Instruction, and Lesson Delivery aligned to Sheltered Instruction. Cultural Awareness, Sociolinguistic Competence, and Bilingualism will be presented by the ENL team with the support of New York City RBE-RN resource specialist.Topic 1:Rationale: Revisiting the mandates and the co-teaching models (K-2). Module 1: Part 154 and Seven Co-teaching Models. Trainees: ENL teachers and Content ELA teachers serving K-2.Schedule and Duration: October 15, 2018, from 2:20 to 3:40.Topics to be covered: Collaborative methodology, and demands of the Federal law.Providers: ENL team and Coordinator (N.Bauer).Topic 2:Rationale: Revisiting the mandates and the co-teaching models (3-5). Module 1: Part 154 and Seven Co-teaching Models. Trainees: ENL teachers and Content ELA teachers serving 3-5.Schedule and Duration: October 22, 2018, from 2:20 to 3:40.Topics to be covered: Collaborative methodology, and demands of the Federal law.Providers: ENL team and Coordinator (N.Bauer).Topics: 3Rationale: The Nuts and Bolts of Sheltered Instruction.Trainees: New ENL teachers, ELA content area teachers and service providers of ENL's.Schedule and Duration: December 10, 2018, from 2:20 to 3:40.Topics to be covered: What is sheltered instruction? How does differentiation take place? ClassroomMaps of 2018-19 CEP 55  Part C: Professional Development students’ needs and planning for small groups.Providers: ENL team, N.Bauer (ENL Coordinator), Diane Howitt's (Regional Bilingual Network Specialist).Topic 4: Cultural Clash and Learner’s AnxietyRationale: Understanding social-emotional and cultural aspects of language learning.Trainees: ENL teachers, ELA Content area teachers and all related staff working with ENL.Schedule and duration: Spring.Topics to be covered: Bridging cultural differences, lowering the affective filter, and building linguistic identity: BilingualismProviders: ENL team, N.Bauer (ENL Coordinator), Diane Howitt's (Regional Bilingual Network Specialist).Topic 5: Differentiating Curriculum for the ENL PopulationRationale: Understanding the linguistic needs of ENLs.Trainees: ENL teachers, ELA Content area teachers and all related staff working with ENL.Schedule and duration: Spring.Topics to be covered: Complexities of language learning, hindrances to language acquisition and solutions.Provider: Irma Marzan Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In order to support parents and facilitate family integration into the school community, our Parent Coordinator in collaboration with ENL teachers works to organize workshops and programs that meet the needs of parents of ENL students. Assigned translators are present in workshops and parent meetings and at parents’ request. In addition, correspondence is translated into the parents’ home language.Record Keeping and Parent Correspondence: All parents, including parents of ENLs, will be notified of workshops and programs offered by the school in the parents' preferred language via flyers and monthly calendars of events that are sent home together with specific invitations. Once the event takes place, the agenda, the flyer, and the sign-in sheet will be filed by the Parent Coordinator.Topic 1: NutritionRationale: Parents will learn to cook healthier mealsSchedule and Duration: October 2018 to June 2019Topics to be covered: Bilingual nutritional coursesName of the Provider: Maurice Held (CBO)Notification to Parents: Flyers will be sent home a week before the event and a reminder will be sent the day before. Topic 2: HomeworkRationale: Assisting parents with the complexities of homeworkSchedule: Every other weekTopics to be covered: How to Help your Child with Homework K-5.Provider: Literacy coaches/ENL teachersNotification to Parents: Same as above Topic 3: Fire SafetyRationale: Educating parents about fire hazardsSchedule: November 13, 2018Topics to be covered: Preventing firesProvider: Bronx Fire DepartmentNotification to Parents: Same as aboveTopic 4: Identity Theft.Rationale: Informing about areas of identity theftSchedule: November 20, 2018Topics to be covered: Internet safetyProvider: Legal ShieldNotifications to Parents: Same as aboveTopic 5: ELA for Parents Rationale: Helping parents understand what is required for the ELA State TestSchedule: December 18, 2018Topics to be covered: Understanding text complexity and ESNL reading strategiesProvider: Ms. Diaz (3rd grade ESL) Ms. BauerNotifications to Parents: Same as aboveTopic 6: Math for Parents Rationale: Helping parents understand what is required for the Math State TestSchedule: January 15, 2019Topics to be covered: Math test structure, word problems, and 2018-19 CEP 56 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities keywordsProvider: Ms. Martinez (4th grade ESL), and ENL Coordinator (Ms. Bauer)Notifications to Parents: Same as above Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Literacy and Arts Academy Borough Bronx School Number 196 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lizzette Graciani Coach Crystal Hyman ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Bauer Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Fortune C.Core Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Kupetz ENL Related-Service Provider Ms. Lopez Superintendent Ms. Rosado Jacqueline Assistant Principal Ms. Aponte Coach Ms. Green School Counselor Ms. Graham Parent Ms. Sosa Parent Coordinator Ms.J. Pando Field Support Center Staff Member Karyna Tejeda Other (Name and Title) Ms.Mathew ENL C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 9 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 900 2018-19 CEP 58 Total number of ELLs 280 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 31.11%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year 1 Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2016-17 2017-18 K 1 0 1 Lang. SP SP Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 0 1 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 1 0 0 0 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Data from the most recent New York State Tests, the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL and Spanish LAB scores are used at the beginning of the year to give ENL teachers a snapshot of the students’ academic profile and their academic background. This information is used in conjunction with assessments at the beginning of the year to form small groups. All teachers (push-in ENL and classroom) understand that the groups are based on the needs of each student and the mandated hours. According to the most recent available data, P.S. 196 has a population of 978 students of those 28.2% are ELLs. As per the collected data, 10.26% of ELLs scored at the commanding level on the NYSESLAT and the highest concentration of commanding students is in 3rd, and 4 th grades. Ninety-eight percent of the English Language Learners that took the 2016-17 ELA tests scored at a level 1 or 2 or high 2Throughout the year, the ENL teachers in combination with the overflow teachers analyze data from a variety of sources such as teacher observations, formative assessment, homework, etc.) formal 2018-19 CEP 59  assessments (i.e. Measures of Student Learning MOSL, content area unit assessments), and benchmark assessments and (Fountas & Pinnell . 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ENL teachers and overflow teachers meet with their coaches and lead teachers at least once a week.The data specialist shares the information with the teacher support team as well, so that the most recent data is available school-wide to modify lesson plans, small group instruction, and pacing calendar. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Each year the Bilingual/ENL Coordinator, and the ENL teachers evaluate the effectiveness of our programs for ENLs by looking at several sources of data including summative assessments from yearly New York State Tests including the NYSESLAT, ELA, Math and Science exams. This information is used in conjunction with data gathered throughout the year from formal assessments (i.e. unit tests), and benchmark assessments (Fountas & Pinnell, on-demand writing sample) to guide future curriculum and programming decisions. In addition, the EDAT Tool is also used to plan for supplementary programs. The major areas of need are reading and writing, especially because students at Transitioning level across the grades need more support to avoid stagnation in these areas.F & P and benchmarks have shown this tendency. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, the data specialist meets with the teachers, and the lead teachers to discuss how the modifications and to focus the attention on the areas of concern. The data is utilized to organize the after school programs.Targeted instruction and strategic clusters of students were aligned to produce a program that covers the specific needs of the ENL population.The program had different subdivisions including bilingual math for Entering students, Enrichment for Intermediate students, and Creative Writing for Expanding and Commanding students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] A variety of data (NYS scores, student portfolios, benchmark assessments (DIBELS) and formative assessments) are used to determine students (including ENLs) that are eligible for RtI. Once identified, benchmark, running records and formative assessment data is collected to make decisions on where a student is exited or continue with RtI. The intervention groups are divided into: Tier I: Whole group instruction with guided small group instruction. Tier II: interventions targeted to a specific small group of students that have been identified by the FAST team as needing more focused instruction. At Tier II a specific program is used such as Recipe for Reading or Max Scholar. Tier III: Intense smaller groups support using programs such as SPIRA, Sound Sensible, and or Max Scholar. Students that are at high risk are receiving instruction in small groups in Tier I for a period of 6 weeks. Once progress is determined they can move to a Tier II group for another 6 weeks of intensive support. Strategies for both groups are trialed for two weeks. If there is stagnation in any particular case the student will be placed in a smaller group. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Analysis of NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores reveal that students are progressing in their language development with the largest percentage of ENLs that scored at the Transitioning and Expanding level on last years NYSESLAT in grades 1-5. EN EM TR EX CM 1 4% 20% 23% 52% 0% 2 9% 33% 28% 28% 2% 3 9% 4% 15% 54% 17% 4 6% 6% 34% 46% 9% 5 24% 9% 18% 45% 3% 2018-19 CEP 60  Teacher's analysis of NYSESLAT and NYSTELL data revealed that students continue to struggle with reading where scores tend to be the lowest in grades K -5 and Writing, where scores tend to the lowest in grades 1 - 5. After analysis, of the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data, teachers expressed a need and have begun to review and modify curriculum to strengthen support for ENLs in all grades through TC reading and writing. There is a correlation between language proficiency level and successful performance.On testing grades the students that are successful on state exams are the Expanding and Commanding. Students that are SIFE or have special needs struggle with moving up language proficiency levels.As a result, the after school program offered Raising Readers that seeks to meet the needs of these learners. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers are given the language proficiency levels of the RLER and an analysis derived from the EDAT tool specific to their class group.This is used as a reference for programming classes and for designing coherent lesson planning and instruction.In addition, the EDAT is used to program students for integrated ENL in specific subject areas.Besides, the EDUR (monthly ELL Data Update Report) is used to ensure that all ELLs are programmed in STARS according to their proficiency levels. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 196 has 2 ENL classes or more in each grade (K-5) depending on the number of students and the Parent Selection. Students are grouped by grade level and placed in classes according to their language proficiency level in order to maximize services.Besides, Kindergarten and 1st grade bilingual, there is an ENL class in each grade (K-5) taught mostly by an ENL/ELA certified teacher. This class has students from Entering to Transitioning as they require more mandated minutes and they need more support. Students in this context receive the required stand-alone and integrated minutes based on their English proficiency level. ENL certified teachers that in the pathway for dual certification are being coached by a Common Branch teacher that pushes for a minimum of 4 periods (50 minutes each). The ENL overflow classes in each grade receive the Expanding and Commanding students. In addition, this class is mixed with regular education students so that these ENLs can transition more easily into mainstream instruction.The overflow classes are co -taught by Common Branch certified teacher as the homeroom teacher and an ENL certified teacher that pushes in for 4 periods a week (200 minutes) meeting the integrated ENL/ELA requirement of 90-180 minutes per week. The same model is implemented for ENL students in ICT or 12-1 or 12-1-1 classes. A certified ENL teacher pushes in for 4 periods per week and pulls out students that scored at an EN or EM level to provide 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL. b. TBE program. If applicable. The language proficiency levels are used to program for the bilingual classes.The schedule is thought out for Entering and Emergent first as they require 180 of ENL Stand Alone.The requirements of Part 154 regarding the mandated hours of Home Language Arts and Content Core in Home Language Arts are also considered.The program is 70% English 30% Spanish in both our Kinder and !st grade bilingual.The HLA is taught daily for a period ,and there are two bilingual subjects: Math and Science. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 61  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Self-contained ENL classes in each grade (K-5) receive the mandated hours of ENL Stand Alone and the integrated minutes during the day.The ELA/ ENL occurs during reading and writing by an ENL certified teacher. The Stand Alone takes place during a block on the day and it is strategized based on language level. HLA is given daily during a specific block during the day as well based on the proficiency on the HL. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ELLs will meet the demands of NYS Learning Standards will be met by working collaboratively with the teahers,using data analysis to create program interventions to help struggllng students and allow high functioning students to move up. Beyond scaffolding and differentiating core content area to meet the diverse needs of our ELL population, teachers use a variety of instructional strategies that provide additional support for ENLs such as explicit instruction, visual aids, sentence frames to support writing and conversation. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students that are speakers of the Spanish language are administered the Spanish Lab to guide instruction. For other languages on staff, we have a teacher that speaks French, and a Bengali speaker to assess students’ native language level. Newcomers that qualify for 3rd, 4th and 5th are given the SIFE interview in their native language which also can be used as a tool to plan instruction.In addition, students have access to the translated exams. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status When a student is identified as SIFE, staff members use multiple measures to determine the nature and extent of the students’ prior knowledge and educational experiences including NYSITELL, Spanish LAB, Fountas & Pinell, and Math baselines. Based on student literacy and numeracy skills, classroom and push-in ESL teachers differentiate instruction with scaffolded lessons used to address the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading and writing) with an intense focus on academic vocabulary development, phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, comprehension, writing, and grammar. Teachers use data from formal and informal assessments to place the students in small groups and determine the skills focus for each group. In addition, official SIFE questionnaire and the State SIFE Assessment are implemented to document process. Interventions for Newcomers, Developing, LTE and Former ELLs vary according to their language acquisition needs.Small group instruction during the day and even during after school with materials with different complexity levels are of key importance to better serve the needs of our ENL students. The addition of a co-teacher in this classes maximizes the benefits of this style of instruction.Students within all subgroups (newcomers, developing, long-term and former ELLs) that lack the foundational skills in English or struggle with reading in English are placed in small groups for phonics instruction. For ELLs in K-3 classes, this phonics program (Words Their Way) would serve as a second dose to reinforce and provide additional support and direct instruction. Al former ENLs are placed in one of the overflow classrooms to ensure that they receive support from a certified ENL teachers for at least two years after scoring at the P (Proficient) level on the old NYSESLAT or CM (Commanding) level on the new NYSESLAT. New arrivals (0-3 years) receive their Stand Alone in the classroom during the day and receive targeted instruction in small group settings. 2018-19 CEP 62  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ENL-SWDs have access to the same grade level curriculum as general education teachers and employ strategies that support ENLs and SWDs. Some instructional strategies include small group instruction, targeted vocabulary instruction, the use of visuals, sentence frames and technology (all teachers have access to I-pad and/or laptop carts). Certified ESL teachers co-plan with Special Education certified teachers to push-in and provide additional support and small group instruction targeted to meet the needs of their ENLs. Supplemental materials such as Words Their Way for ELLs, The Code by Nancy Hill from School Specialty, or Step Forward Language for Everyday Life by Ingrid Wisniewska from Oxford University Press target and accelerate English language acquisition. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The new programming will allow ENL teachers to push into ICT and 12:1 classes with ENL-SWDs four (4) periods per week (200 minutes) and for students that scored at the EN or EM levels on the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL and therefore require 360 minutes, the same teacher will pull them out for small group instruction four 4 periods per week. (200 minutes) Teachers who push into Special Education classrooms are aware of the students' IEP goals and work with the teacher to support students academic and linguistic goals. Additionally, a SETTS push-in/pull out program will allow for students with disabilities (SWDs) access to their non-disabled peers and general education curriculum. Classroom placement is determined by school based support team findings and each student academic and personal needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Tier I: Whole group instruction with guided small group instruction. Tier II: interventions targeted to a specific small group of students that have been identified by the FAST team as needing more focused instruction. At Tier II a specific program is used such as Recipe for Reading or Max Scholar. Tier III: Intense smaller groups support using programs such as SPIRE, Sound Sensible, Max Scholar. Students that are at high risk are receiving instruction in small groups in Tier I for a period of 6 weeks. Once progress is determined they can move to a Tier II group for another 6 weeks of intensive support. Strategies for both groups are monitored for two weeks. If there is stagnation in any particular case the student will be placed in a reduced group. AIS teachers provide targets instruction/intervention based on school data (formal and informal assessments) in all subject areas (science, social studies, math and ELA) using supplements provided within the Common Core aligned curriculum in addition to programs identified above. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In previous years, P.S. had one ENL class per grade and ENLs that were not in the ENL class were distributed among all teachers in the grade which dictated a primarily pull out program. This year we are re-organizing the programming to be a primarily push-in program with minimal pull-out to fulfill the mandates of Part 154. Additionally, this new programming has given us some time to work in small groups with new arrivals at the EN and EM levels. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No program will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ENLs are invited to any after-school programs ongoing all year. Currently, we are planning an after-school program that program that will support new arrivals and students at the intermediate level. All invitations are translated into the parent's language of preference. Programming is based on the theories of targeted instruction and learning communities. We have afters school programs that meet the needs of the ENL all year depending on the need and the target group. Based on the data reported above, P.S. 196 will host a learning community program with subdivisions. During this after school 2018-19 CEP 63  program “Newcomer Academy" will target Entering, Emerging and Transitioning students from 2nd to 5th grade. Instruction will focus on reading strategies in guided reading groups, word study, vocabulary practice, controlled writing techniques to improve writing performance and listening comprehension activities with a final product. Under the same subdivision, students that are under the same category will receive support in Math as part of the program in Casa de Matematicas. The program Creative Writing will include students whose language proficiency are expanding or commanding and instruction will consist in L+1 reading and writing activities to facilitate growth. The same group of teachers will participate in the “ENL Enrichment Program” servicing students under the following categories: Newcomers, Transitioning, and Expanding in grade bands from 2-5.Students will be exposed to vocabulary , language lab, text comprehension strategies and will make use of controlled writing to improve their academic performance. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Academic, technological and native language supports are available in all ENL classrooms and include: books available in the native language, bilingual dictionaries/glossaries, picture dictionaries, phonics based computer programs, SmartBoards, laptop computer and I-Pads carts. When possible, content area books are available in Spanish for students to use in the classroom and/or take home, providing students and parents with all the tools necessary to succeed. Go Math!, used in K-5, includes an ELL component providing student workbooks, enrichment materials and intervention materials for ENLs as well as a Spanish language- edition and glossary. TCRWP will be used in grades K-5, provides suggestions and resources for ELL modifications/supports for each lesson. A listening library is available for The ELL Coordinator/Coach along with the ENL push-in team works side by side with teachers to ensure curriculum supports ENLs while maintaining alignment to the CCLS. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered through glossaries, and use of bilingual dictionaries. Students are grouped using their native language as a commonality as much as possible.There is an effort to maintain cultural identity as the students enjoy a borrowing library with books in Spanish and French. They are encouraged to read at home with family members 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services support and resources provided by the school are based on grade level and age. The subgroups serviced by the support teams are divided by reading level as well as grade level. The resources are age appropriate and rigorous enough to meet the demands of the Core Curriculum 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The administration from both buildings coordinate efforts very early in the years and or during the summer to maintain order and organize the use of common space such as the auditorium, cafeteria.Also, lunch times are scheduled wisely so that students from both schools have enough time for lunch and recess. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The Parent Coordinator and classroom teachers offer a variety of activities with parents and students that support all students including ENLs Upon arrival, new ELL students are greeted by an ENL Team Member as well as the Parent Coordinator who is fluent in both English and Spanish. We have a large Spanish-speaking community and find it comforting for new arrivals to hear their language in a government facility. For students who speak a language other than Spanish, we have, French and Bengali speakers. 2018-19 CEP 64  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our Professional Development plan includes opportunities for all staff members that work with ENLs including teachers of ENLs. PD includes opportunities for learning on topics such as: Planning with Language in Mind, Co-teaching models, Feedback to Students, Explicit Instruction, Guided Reading Strategies struggling readers, language acquisition and development, and cultural sensitivity. For our first, 4 week session of professional learning, all teachers will participate in three learning opportunities, two learning opportunities will be small group PLCs on a variety of topics that will meet four times. The third learning opportunity is a book club, all staff members will read the same book and will meet (7 times) in small groups to discuss the book, it impacts on their teaching practice, and how strategies discussed can be implemented in the classroom. For our first small group PLC, teachers of ENLs will analyze NYSESLAT/NYSITELL data to gain a better understanding of their ENLs and then focus on strategies and best practices for language instruction. Beyond the small group PLC that is discussed above the administration, ELL Coach and Literacy Coaches visit classrooms. Evidence collected from all parties during classroom visits is used to develop any additional support that teachers of ELLs may require. Support includes targeted feedback, co -planning during common preps, modeling and one-on- one professional development to ensure teachers of ELLs are able to support ELLs with the CCLS. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school gives PD every Monday from 2:20 p.m. to 3:40 p.m. to all staff to meet the demands of Part 154 in preparation for the school year. Following those guidelines, 50% of the sessions dedicated to ENL instruction are for ENL teachers and 15% of general classroom teachers. Besides PD sessions, the school utilizes consultants, mentors, and reflective supervisor to enhance instruction performance.Facilitators’ Training: Presenters feed into other workshops given by the ENL Service Coordinator: Karyna Tejeda and the Compliance Specialist Wladimir Pierre on a monthly basis at the district level. In addition, Diane Howitt, the Regional Bilingual Network Specialist from Fordham University gives training to the facilitators once a month on compliance and instructional matters. This training is turned into Professional Development sessions for the staff servicing ENLs. Irma Marzan, an educational consultant will be hired through Fordham University to support the teachers in ENL differentiation.Record Keeping: Agendas and attendance sheets for ENL related PDs are kept by the coordinator in the file. 2018-19 CEP 65  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teachers in self-contained classrooms and push-in programs will schedule a time to meet with parents to conduct an annual, individual meetings with parents of ENLs. Meetings will be scheduled during Tuesday's Parent Outreach time and discuss student's language development in all content areas. Teachers will maintain a log of the meeting(s) that includes the date, who was in attendance and topics of discussion. In-house staff members will provide translation when possible, otherwise teacher will use translation and interpretation unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. #2 - Teachers will maintain a log of contact made with parents regarding the annual meetings. This log will include the date, was occurred (letter sent home, phone call, in-person meeting), who was in attendance, and topics of discussion. In house staff members will provide translation when possible, otherwise teacher will use translation and interpretation unit. #3 Throughout the year students and their families participated in numerous events such as Math Bowl, Family Math Night, Authors & Artist Night and Dance shows in school. Teachers conduct workshops for parents on a variety of topics for the Common Core in ELA and Math, and the ESL teachers gave integrated workshops (parents and their children) on Math, ELA, and Cultural Awareness. In addition Parent engagement and outreach in our school through the Family Worker included: •Parent Involvement Program •Early Childhood Parent Workshop on Positive Discipline Routines School to Home Activities •ELA Readiness Workshop •ELA Reading Tips Workshop •Positive Discipline and Transitioning to Kindergarten by the BOED Pre K Supervisor Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lizzette Graciani, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Ps 196 School DBN: 12X196 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lizzette Graciani Title Principal Ariel Delgado Assistant Principal J.Pando S.Bauer S.Sosa B.Fortune K.Kupetz C.Hyman A.Mckenna Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Melissa Batista School Counselor Rosado Jacqueline K.Tejeda Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Dist.12 R.Mathew Other ENL V.Lopez C.Vega Other SETTS Other Spec.Ed Liaison Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/8/17 9/8/17 9/8/17 9/8/17 9/8/17 9/8/17 9/8/17 9/8/17 9/8/17 9/8/17 9/5/18 9/8/17 9/8/17 9/8/17 9/8/17 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X196 School Name: Literacy and Arts Academy Superintendent: Rosado Jacqueli The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Reena Sandra Mathew Bauer ENL teacher ENL/Bilingual coordinator Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes 11/29/16 Yes (Scheduled for 11/18) Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. PS 196 gathers information regarding parents’ preferred language for communication through the RCPL(Parent Preferred Language Report) resourced from the intake information which was input in the ATS. In addition, we will use emergency contact cards as another resource to indicate parent's preferred language for the students’ teachers. ATS will be updated accordingly using the RAPL(Adult Preferred Language Report) function. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 69  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 4 0 2 1 1 0 482 627 2 Arabic Bengali Chinese (any) French Malinke Mandarin English Spanish Wolof Data as of 9/20/18 .036% .0% .18% .09% .09% 0 42.92% 55.83% .18% 3 1 1 1 1 1 473 638 2 .027% .09% .17% .09% .09% .09% 42.12% 56.81% .12% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A as of 9/20/18 Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Newsletters Monthly Sept-June Principal Letters Sept/Dec/May Invitations to school wide events (i.e:workshops,orientations,Fundraising, Dec/March/June How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. in-school personnel where applicable, contracted vendors for languages that school personnel cannot cover, as well as DOE templates for covered languages. in-school personnel where applicable, contracted vendors for languages that school personnel cannot cover, as well as DOE templates for covered languages. in-school personnel where applicable, contracted vendors for languages that school 2018-19 CEP 70  school trips,etc. ) Individualized Educational Plans (IEPs) Sept-June as necessary Student specific correspondence Sept-June as necessary personnel cannot cover, as well as DOE templates for covered languages. in-school personnel where applicable, contracted vendors for languages that school personnel cannot cover, as well as DOE templates for covered languages. in-school personnel where applicable, contracted vendors for languages that school personnel cannot cover, as well as DOE templates for covered languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Open house Sept. parent-teacher conferences,SLT and PTA meetings. Sept/Nov/March/May All school-based family meetings:Math Night,Authors and Artists' Night,parent workshops,ENL Orientations,and one to one meetings with parents. Sept-June IEP meetings Sept-June provide interpretation service(s)? Telephone interpretation; school-based staff; contracted vendor; community-based partners. Telephone interpretation; school-based staff; contracted vendor; community-based partners. Telephone interpretation; school-based staff; contracted vendor; community-based partners. Telephone interpretation; school-based staff; contracted vendor; community-based partners. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. If there is a school emergency,we offer a variety of ways of communication with family sin their preferred language. Our school plans to use the Language Line to notify parents that they can communicate with the school in their preferred language, as well as train any school-based staff on how to use the 3-way calling system in order to add Language Line to any incoming calls. The use of I-pads with electronic translators such as speech to text, or parallel translators are employed as well.The parent coordinator will have a list of school based staff‘s language proficiencies as an alternative to enhance communication between the school and the families.The school uses the following 2018-19 CEP 71  electronic systems to communicate with parents in the event of a school emergency: "School Messenger" for alerts,and teachers utilize"Remind",and "Class Dojo" to be in ongoing communication with parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We plan to extend opportunities for our Language Access Coordinator to present at school-based professional development meetings turn-keying all training on language access as well as distribute information regarding the Language Line to staff. The Chancellor's Regulation A-663 will be discussed in these meetings as well. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Information regarding the translation and interpretation services are posted at the security desk at the entrance of the school as well as the main office. The multilingual “Hello” posters are displayed together with the Parent Guide to Language Access, and the Language ID Guide at the counter in the main office. The poster with the language line is also on display with the school language code, for personnel use. The LAC will ensure that all correspondence and meetings are performed in the parents' language of preference, I-pads with translators are offered in meetings as well for parents and staff to communicate with each other as additional support. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from limited-English-proficient parents on the language services they receive, the school will conduct an annual survey using the LTI questionnaire regarding their satisfaction with language assistance throughout the school year and asking for feedback regarding any improvements they feel can be made in the upcoming school year.This data will be used to improve the systems in place and explore the possibility of extending our resources. 2018-19 CEP 72 
