2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X199 School Name: P.S. 199X - THE SHAKESPEARE SCHOOL Principal: YASMIN QUEZADA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Shakespeare School 320900010199 School Number (DBN): 09X199 Pre-Kindergarten, Kindergarten, First, Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth 1449 Shakespeare Avenue, Bronx, NY 10452 718-681-7172 718-681-7176 Phone Number: YasminQuezada Fax: Yquezad@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: YasminQuezada Ms. Morris Ms. Cacpata Myrna Rodriguez Mr. Rodriguez n/a n/a V. Samuel District Information Geographical District: 09 Superintendent’s Office Address: Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue, Suite 102, Bronx, NY 10456 LRosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-579-7143 Phone Number: 718-410-7017 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx, NY 10458 nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Yasmin Quezada GeneineMorris Ms. Capata Brenda Santiago Mr. Rodriguez V. Samuel Myrna Salguero Richard Abshire *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher-SLT Chairperson Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Megan Guerra Blaine Gibbs Maria Abreau Maria Mejia Yvette Rodriguez Consuelo Marte Marilyn Rivera Cloud Kemch ArdytheBryan MariamDiakite Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? 09X199 School's Mission: Section 4: SCEP Overview The Shakespeare School is a diverse community of learners. Our teachers, families and scholars trust in each other’s commitment to equity and excellence. Scholars will engage in developmentally appropriate rigorous tasks on a daily basis, in a risk-free student-centered environment. 09X199 School's Vision: All students under our care will socially, emotionally and academically succeed at school in a risk-free environment. The experienced success will pave the way for every child to be college and career ready. 09X199 Equity Goal: We will ensure that all students, regardless of their race, gender, ethnicity, language, disability, sexual orientation, family history and income are supported to reach their highest potential by experiencing high expectations and challenging instruction that supports their personal and academic growth in a welcoming and supportive learning environment. Every scholar in our school will have the opportunity to excel. This will result in continued reduction of incidences as measured on our OORS reports, an improvement on the school quality survey indicators, improved achievement for all students in all subgroups in all state and city assessments. 09X199 Where is our P.R.I.D.E.: Pupil-centered pedagogy and content which are Responsive and Rigorous, Interactive, Diverse and Engaging; resulting in equity and access, high expectations, and improved learning outcomes for all students and stakeholders. Administration clearly communicates the school's mission and district’s initiatives and efforts to promote equity, diversity and a safe environment during weekly meetings and Monday Professional Developments. Here at The Shakespeare school we celebrate successes and accomplishments of all students and staff. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS199x, a Pre-K-Grade 5 school located in the Highbridge section of the Bronx, serves approximately 730 students. We are a multicultural, multilingual community of students, teachers, parents, and support personnel working to create a generation of young people who are critical thinkers, clear communicators, and collaborative team mates. We have expanded our curriculum for the 2018-2019 school year to include the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Units of Study, and Envision Math 2.0. We have continued incorporating the use of the Five Practices for Orchestrating Mathematical Discussions, a constructivist approach that fosters critical thinking in every Math Lesson. In addition, we have designated the first 45 mins of our day to Close Reading. The compilation of these curricula and the District's Initiatives will support attainment of our school goals in which equitably address the diverse needs of our students and support in gaining a command of positive social-emotional skills, thereby reaching academic heights and having greater access to rigorous instruction. The TCRWP Units of Study are aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards and follow a balanced workshop model approach to literacy. Throughout these units of study, students have the opportunity to explore narrative and non-fiction texts through reading and discussion, as well as write opinion, information, poetry and narrative writing pieces. The units allow time for teachers to respond to data and teach in small groups and through one to one 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  conferring. The goal of the units is to explicitly teach students to transfer the skills and knowledge they have developed from one discipline and one year to another, so that instruction cumulates and builds over time. Envision Math 2.0 is an interactive multi-media math program that addresses the CCLS, Math Fluencies, and Mathematical Practices. Envision is also CCLS aligned and allows students to participate in inquiry, project based learning, and performance tasks. Students gain access to the curriculum through colorful text, engaging video, and interactive touch-screen activities. This multi-layered access provides teachers with the ability to pull data from many sources to inform their instruction and support our students toward meeting their instructional goals. Sanford Harmony is a social-emotional learning curriculum that supports teachers in the facilitation of learning activities that support the development of skills of positive interaction between students. This will enhance their ability to be in touch with their emotions, and to develop the skills to cope with challenging situations and conflict. School Counselors and PBIS team members were trained in August 2018 how to use the curriculum. The goal is to turn-key information to teachers to use buddy up conversation starters and quick connection cards. Due to problems beyond our control, we were unable to roll out Sanford Harmony with fidelity to all classes. The school has set aside funds to work with Brain Power for mindfulness training. This program utilizes an exciting combination of physical, emotional and cognitive exercises to tap into our infinite brain potential. We also invite parents into the school in purposeful, authentic ways via our Classroom Dojo School page. We are a school committed to our scholars who has made numerous revisions and adjustments based on the growing needs of our staff, students, and families. At this point, we have developed a cohesive approach that honors our instructional vision and the spirit of our community. We pride ourselves on doing key things uniformly as a school, but ensuring coherence in all other areas. We devote ample time to professional development, especially for teachers new to our school. Teachers and children are treated as individuals who are vibrant parts of this learning community. As a school community we have established a culture of self-evaluation on a yearly basis. We begin with our Parent-Staff School Retreat late May. We revise and make new plans for the upcoming school year. The process itself is embedded in our daily practices as well. We are a school that strongly believes in distributive leadership; therefore one of our senior teachers has led our School Leadership Team (SLT) for the past seven years. The SLT outlines our Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP) goals under the leadership of our schools administrative team. As part of the self-evaluative process, all staff members are previewed to data pertinent to student learning outcomes and achievement. Additionally, all staff engage in activities to analyze student achievement data to reflect deeply on our current practices, past challenges, and success in reaching instructional goals. We convene together and create cohorts of teachers and educational assistants aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. We align our school wide instructional goals to support the work toward the Framework for Great Schools and the progress of our District. Our administrative team, embeds protocols that promote rigor and rich discussion on understanding the Framework for Great Schools and how it applies to our work for the upcoming school year. It is imperative for all participants to equally contribute to the discussion in order to have a valid and equitable process. Over the past school year our teachers have come together as teams on a weekly basis. These meetings are data driven, results oriented and anchored on the current needs of the school. As a common practice, teachers engage in a reflective cycle about planning and instruction: This process fosters, "Our Shakespeare Scholars through the command of social and emotional skills will reach academic heights and have greater access to rigorous instruction", our theme for the 2018-2019 school year, amongst teachers from all grade levels. The administration has facilitated organizational adjustments, such as common preparation periods. Teachers have taken advantage of this accommodation and they seek to regularly meet as teams voluntarily to engage in academic discourse. There are strategic leaders on each grade level team, in order to guide 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  the team through this reflective process as it aligns with our schools instructional goals. Administration has equipped the teachers with knowledge on the expectations and use of common language of the Danielson's Framework on 4e-Growing and Developing Professionally. Through their core work in teachers teams using the reflective process outlined above, teachers engage in a shared inquiry process that has inspired many of them to take the initiative to host Individualized Professional Developments for the entire staff on different topics, such as, Effective Lesson Planning and Integrating Technology into Lesson planning. It is the norm of teacher team meetings to discuss best practices that will lead to student achievement. As a result of this reflective process as a school, it is evident that a paradigm shift needs to take place in the support systems that our school currently offers our growing population of students who reside in local neighborhood shelters. Homelessness has a devastating impact on the lives approximately 220 students. Currently, the closing the gap school social worker serves as the liaison between the school and shelters, creating and sustaining a strong link between parents, teachers and students. We have provided ALL of our scholars with a full set of the school uniform and for those STH, we also provide book bags, school supplies and 2 sets of the school uniforms with sweaters. The school is hiring an STH Community Coordinator acts as the STH school-based liaison, identifying and facilitating supports to housing-unstable students alongside team members inside the school, such as social work and guidance staff, attendance team members, health and mental health providers, teachers, school safety officers, and other personnel. Coordinators will also interact with other DOE offices and City agency partners, including the DOE Office of Pupil Transportation, shelter staff, Field Support Centers, and other City agencies. As a result of reflecting on our current practices, our Theory of Action is as follows: We are committed in creating a culture of learners to meet the needs of your school community and/or instructional focus, which is to engage in a high -quality, data - driven, differentiated small group instruction that provides equitable access to curriculum and utilize multiple discussion strategies on a daily basis. Then, ALL students will continue to show growth in all content areas and develop the communication and collaboration skills that support college and career readiness For the 2018-2019 academic school year, our school will adopt a behavioral intervention program aligned with our RTI, AIS and PBIS systems. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our enrollment has a disproportionately high representation of sub-groups most-at-risk of academic failure: 97.5% Title 1 eligible; 67.4% Latino; 29.6% Black; 20% Students with Disabilities; 27.6% English Language Learners ; and 28% Students in Temporary Housing. The direct impact of serving students with interrupted formal education and high mobility rate is a growing population of students who are low-performing and at least two years behind their grade level. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the 2017-18 School Quality Guide 09X199 has demonstrated progress in five of the Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools (Framework Element Scores and Survey Element Scores). We demonstrated the most progress in Effective School Leadership, Strong Family Community Ties and Trust. We will continue to demonstrate progress in all 6 elements and increase even more in the element of Supportive Environment for the 2018-19 SY. +Rigorous Instruction Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Framework Element Scores: 2017-3.34 vs. 2018-3.43 Survey Element Scores: 2017-2.85 vs. 2018-3.20 -Supportive Environment The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Framework Element Scores: 2017-3.07 vs. 2018-N/A Survey Element Scores: 2017-3.21 vs. 2018-3.16 +Collaborative Teachers Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Framework Element Scores: 2017-3.77 vs. 2018-4.06 Survey Element Scores: 2017-3.29 vs. 2018-3.87 +*Effective School Leadership Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Framework Element Scores: 2017-3.99 vs. 2018-4.37 Survey Element Scores: 2017-3.23 vs. 2018-4.19 Data: 98% of families say that the principal at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school. (Q3c) 100% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning. (Q11d) 100% of teachers say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. (Q9e) +*Strong Family-Community Ties School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Framework Element Scores: 2017-2.98 vs. 2018-3.67 Survey Element Scores: 2017-2.63 vs.2018-3.44 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Data: 100% of teachers say that teachers at this school understand families' problems and concerns. (Q9b) 100% of teachers say that staff regularly communicate with families about how they can help students learn. (Q9d) +*Trust Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Framework Element Scores: 2017-3.08 vs. 2018-4.06 Survey Element Scores: 2017-3.08 vs. 2018-4.06 Data: 99% of families say that they feel respected by their child's teachers. (Q1f) 98% of teachers say that the principal has confidence in the expertise of the teachers at their school. (Q5c) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X199 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 749 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 80 80 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 39 36 17 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 93.9% % Reduced Lunch 27.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.2% 67.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.92 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 69% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 64 64 17 91.3% 1.7% 20.0% 25.8% 1.5% 3.2% 6 35% 7.1 29.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to June 2018 scores on the NYS ELA and Math tests, students who met promotional criteria increased by 12% in ELA and 10% in Math for the 2017-2018 school year. As a result, we estimate a projected growth for students approaching, meeting, or exceeding the standards in Mathematics and English Language Arts of approximately 5-7%, with a 3-5% increase in levels 3 and 4. We attribute this growth to our "Golden Hour" close reading, "Power Hour" math practices and fluencies initiatives. With the continuation of these initiatives, we project to maintain our percentage growth. To ensure we address our school goals in which students gain a command of social-emotional skills, thereby reaching academic heights and having greater access to rigorous instruction, we will look at math instruction across all grade levels and support teachers in teaching for a deep conceptual understanding. We provide continued coaching cycles, PD, encourage inter-visitations, designate lab sites for our teachers in the use of the Five Practices for Orchestrating Mathematical Discussions (grades 3-5) and Number Talks (grades K-2) leading us to place a focus on both conceptual understanding as well as problem solving. Continuing with a solid literacy foundation which has been crucial to student success, we have incorporated grade-level reading benchmarks from Kindergarten to Fifth Grade. We will focus on 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  developing our teachers in the areas of balanced literacy including shared/interactive reading/writing, close reading, and stamina independent reading. Students are encouraged to make their thinking visible and support their claims and judgments through rich, thought-provoking conversation with peers, teachers, and through their writing. As a result, we will plan opportunities to balance teacher talk and student discussion, incorporating discussion protocols into everyday classroom conversations. We will build student capacity through scaffolds such as language frames and clear modeling of how arguments can be strengthened with evidence. Through the incorporation of Classroom Dojo, families are able to support academic goals, monitor behavior and achievements, and communicate with students and school support staff. This involvement is evident in over 50% participation of families utilizing this software tool. Onsite staff is always readily available to support parents/families in using Dojo. It is a school wide expectation that teachers are expected to use in order to support/foster the communication between families and the school community in addition to our designated Tuesday's for Parent Engagement. 100% of our students will be using iReady assessments, we aim to increase the use of instructional technology (by students AND teachers) in our classrooms. Priority Needs: In 2017-18 we established and supported 15 AIS groups within two cycles. We will continue with new groups based on 2017-18 state, city, qualitative and quantitative data, to target the specific needs of students who are not performing on grade level for the 2018-2019 school year. Level 1 and level 2 RTI students and students requiring AIS services will be identified in various groups and support will be provided using Leveled Literacy Intervention and Shakespeare after-school program. Our RTI and AIS are designed to support higher achievement for all students, particularly our student sub-groups. Throughout the year, our school will hold our RTI (Response to Intervention) meetings and discussions to help our students develop and increase their skills in reading, math, writing, and behavior. Response to Intervention is a three-tiered problem-solving approach that identifies students struggling in academic areas early. It provides them with systematically applied strategies and targeted instruction at varying levels of intervention. RTI’s goal is to close achievement gaps for all students by addressing small learning problems before they become unbeatable. Diagnostics For students in Grades 4-5, PS 199 will use the NYS ELA and Math Assessment Data to create the Tier 2 groupings Benchmark screening of all students will take place multiple times across the school year. These will include: F&P Benchmarking   Math Benchmarking  iReady RtI and the Three-tiered Model of School Support The three-tiered model provides increasing intensity of instruction to students in direct proportion to individual needs. Each tier has a set of support structures or activities that helps teachers implement research-based curricular and instructional practices designed to improve student achievement. To continue to extend our performance in meeting our goals in terms of "Academic Rigor" we are focused on deepening rigor in literacy and mathematics and developing a deeper understanding of the language demands in all subject areas. Our professional development, collaborative planning and rigorous instruction will work to ensure every student makes progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3-5% increase in students meeting or exceeding the standards in ELA and Mathematics in grades 3-5, as measured by the NYS Grades 3-5 ELA and Math Test scores. There will be a 5-7% increase in students meeting or exceeding the standards in ELA and Mathematics in grades K-2, as measured by running records, summative assessments, and MOSL performance task data. These increases will include all learners in general education, students with IEPs and English as a New Language Learners. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018 to June 2019  All Classroom and Out of Classroom Teachers  All Educational  Assistants Instructional Coaches  Administration September 2018 to June 2019 All Classroom and Out of Classroom Teachers  All Classroom and Out of Classroom Teachers  All K-5 Students  All Classroom and Out of Classroom Teachers  All K-5 Students Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will deepen their questioning and discussion techniques within Reading and Mathematics Instruction and within all classroom structures, to promote peer interaction, critical thinking and essentially improving scholars writing by facilitating a minimum of three different questioning/discussion protocols in their classrooms. Unit and Lesson Planning to include, but not limited to, the following:  The Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Units of Study for Reading and Writing as a primary resource  enVision Mathematics 2.0 curriculum as a primary   resource Fundations curriculum followed with fidelity in grades K-2 "Golden Hour" Close Reading and "Power Hour" Math Practice initiatives  Daily small group instruction using the Fountas and Pinnell Guided Reading Classroom curriculum and Leveled Literacy Intervention Program  Within units pre-, post-, and formative assessments are given for both Math/ELA and data is analyzed and used to inform instruction.  UDL and DI strategies are implemented in order to  address the needs of every student SIOP strategies and language objectives are implemented to address the needs of all learners including SWDs and ENL students.  Units contain specific sections for suggested activities for ELLs and SWDs Support. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21   Action plans for students who require intervention,  either as remediation or enrichment, will be developed an documented. Students who fall into the RtI Tier II or AIS (Tier III) categories will receive small group data driven instruction, in which progress will be regularly assessed, monitored, and documented.  Rebus writing paragraphs, the use of cognates, and the Estrellita Phonic Program all provide supports for our Native Spanish speaking students and SIFE students are strategically targeted and supported.  Number Talks and the 5 Practices will continue to be facilitated to address the mathematical standards and fluencies.  Myon will be used to support reading stamina and  fluency for students to use both at school and at home. I-Ready will be used as a means to monitor scholar progress and to compare the success of our scholars to the success of the students in District 9. Professional Development:  Exploration of best practices in English Language Arts via professional development from Educator Collaborative, LLC.  Exploration of best practices in Guided Reading via professional development from Fountas and Pinnell On-Site Specialists.  Exploration of best practices in Mathematics from Pearson and Showcase Schools.  Coaching cycles from instructional coaches  Showcase school inter-visitations Professional Development - colleague to colleague: Peer Evaluation/Inter-visitation Learning Walks K-5 Classroom Teachers September 2018- June 2019  Administration  Educator Collaborative consultants  Pearson and Heinemann Consultants;  NYC DOE Initiatives Instructional Coaches  K-5 Classroom Teachers Professional learning turnkey opportunities Teacher Team collaboration K-5 Classroom Teachers Every child must come to school. The school's attendance goal is 94%. Each school day the number of children absent and number of children late is posted outside the main office. Teachers with 100% daily class attendance are featured. The All PreK-5 students September 2018- June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Social Worker, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  attendance committee meets weekly. The STH Family Worker from 1605 Nelson Avenue Shelter attends to keep school staff attuned to transient families needs. Afterschool / Extended programs targeting students in levels 1 and 2 K-5 students Guidance Counselors, Family Worker, Attendance Teacher, Pupil Accounting  Administration  K-5 Classroom Teachers selected to facilitate Instructional Coaches  November 2018- May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will attend meetings, ELA/Math game events, school learning walks, classroom celebrations, and conferences that will enable them to be knowledgeable on all the curricular and academic needs of the children. This is in addition to the scheduled Parent Engagement periods on Tuesdays. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Purchase of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Units of Study  Purchase of the enVision Mathematics 2.0 curriculum  Purchase Fountas and Pinnell Guided Reading Classroom and Responsive Teaching Across the Grades   Renewal of i-Ready subscription Scheduled weekly common planning for classroom teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a minimum of 60% of students in grades K-5 will be approaching, meeting, or exceeding the standards in ELA and Math as measured by running record assessments; on-demand and published writing; and summative math assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Running record assessments; on-demand and published writing; and summative math assessments.Teacher Made Assessments, I-Ready, and Charlotte Danielson's Framework for Effective Teaching. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: Analysis of supportive elements in our School Environment Survey from 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 reveal 82% of teachers believe that a lot or all of the adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (i.e. by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings). Also, 85% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. Priority Needs: As a result, our priority needs are to increase engagement of all stake holders in working together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional development health supports that tie to the school’s vision. To continue an emphasis on a School Wide comprehensive and cohesive approach to social-emotional learning that has a variety of appropriate supports and consequences for students-in terms of the Elements 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  of Framework for Great Schools this goal represents "Supportive School Environment". Parents, teachers and scholars will be armed with the common language and skills necessary to improve the development of all scholars social-emotional growth and well-being. Structures in Place: In addition, staff (ie. Social Worker, Counselors, educational assistants and school aides) have been trained and certified in Therapeutic Intervention Strategies (TCIS) to support the development of a safe, student centered learning environment that embraces the diversity, needs and culture of all learners and their families. Educational Assistants participated in ongoing training, and a book study about how to become a trauma informed school. We have two consultants from the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene: Monica Gavilanes(Field Supervisor for School Mental Health Consultant) supports staff with strategies that address both the academic and the social emotional needs of our students. Lissette Paulino (Community Outreach Analyst) supports staff with developing and expanding wellness initiatives. While we address both the academic and the social emotional needs of our students with systems and structures embedded across the school to ensure students' needs are met, we need to use a range of strategies to support the student with self regulation. As evidenced in the 2017-18 School Quality Guide : 53% of teachers say that students behave well in class even when the teacher isn't watching. (Q20i) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of staff and scholars will participate in a school-wide system of behavior expectations and follow the routines of our PBIS program abiding by Shakespeare's-The Knight's Code (The Three R's) resulting in Knight Bucks (paper money) for demonstrating Respectful, Responsible and Ready behaviors. This will result in an improved learning environment as measured by a 25% increase in the number of students participating in PBIS events. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ALL students, September 2018-June 2019 Tier 2 and 3 Behavior Intervention Students included. All Staff for implementing PBIS, Mr. Abshire and the administrative team for overseeing Interventions and follow up practices. External Partnerships for Tier 3 students:  Promise Zone  Visiting Nurse Service of NY  Office of Mental Health Elements of Character Education ● The School wide implementation of The 3R’s (Be Respectful, Be Responsible and Be Ready) will be in its sixth year and has been revised to accommodate the needs of all scholars-targeting the Tier 2 and Tier 3 behavior concerns during RTI meetings and during Parent Meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  ● In Safety Meetings the committee identifies high risk areas and makes revisions to organizational structures. ● Class Dojo will be used in 100% of the classrooms as a means of quantifying behavioral progress and communicating said progressions to parents electronically. ● 100% of staff will use Knight Bucks to promote positive reinforcement. ● Class Meeting time in daily schedules facilitate dedicated time to social and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  emotional learning. Our School Culture Committee and School Discipline Committee will: ● Host frequent assemblies supporting community building and character development for all grades. ● Daily use of Classroom Dojo on the computers to track and monitor student progress and needs for support in order to celebrate student success quarterly. ● Fun Friday to celebrate student success and achievements. Dojo reflection will take place at the same time to include students who did not meet Fun Friday criteria. ● PBIS events, activities, and school store to spend earned Knight Bucks. The School will enhance the Positive Behavior Intervention Program (3R’s) and support the social emotional development of the scholars. Character development assemblies and lessons will arm scholars (especially our STH scholars) with language and skills necessary to speak up and seek out to peers and adults to share information about threats and conflicts. The staff, along with counselors, will use the discipline code and classroom behavior to Teachers, Scholars, Parents. Invited Guest Speakers Sept. 2018-June 2019 All Staff for embedding social-emotional supports and PBIS Liaison Mr. Abshire and Ms. Morris for grade level town hall assemblies. Members of the Discipline Committee and School Culture Committee. All Staff and All Scholars Sept. 2018- June 2019 ALL staff for encouraging and upholding PBIS, Character Development.. Tier 2 and 3 Students, STH and All students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Guidance Counselors, Ms. Santana and Ms. Ramirez for implementing the RFA guidelines and curriculum school wide and teaching strategies to our Tier 2 and Tier 3 students and Students in Temporary 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29 Housing. Social Worker, Ms. Markman and Ms. Kofuma to support families and help scholars transition and function within the school community. PBIS Team; Administraton identify students in need of possible RTI services. The two Guidance Counselors support our Respect for All initiatives by teaching scholars self-regulation strategies to identify and cope with conflict. Our additional Bridge the Gap social worker ands community coordinator will continue to support the Respect For All initiative. Our school Social Worker and Bridge the Gap Community Coordinator will continue to support our families in need. This will, in turn, support the scholars in school and at home. Our school will continue to work with IEP/SETSS teacher to meet the needs of our SWD and support our SWD families and teachers. Midpoint Progress Monitoring: The school has fully implemented the action plan for meeting the goal: 100% of staff and scholars have begun training in a school-wide system of behavior expectations with rewards for positive behavior. In addition, we have enlisted the support of our ATR Guidance Counselor to provide additional support to our students during the lunch periods. K-5 Students Sept 2018-June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops and Trips for Parents (Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Instructional Coaches and Administration) Community Based Organizations (CBO) Grade level town hall meetings and Assemblies (Administration) Classroom Presentations (Teachers) Scheduled meetings (As needed, All personnel) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources- Two guidance counselors, one social worker and community coordinator, Teacher and IEP Teacher, PBIS facilitators Instructional Resources- School wide incentives, trips, and Triumph Boards. NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parents will be surveyed about effective use of Tuesday Parent Engagement Meetings and PTA sponsored events to support parents learning three times a year as we monitor progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Learning Environment survey, Classroom Dojo, OORS reports, Parent Questionnaire, PBIS event participation/attendance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: We deepened our exploration of data analysis in the 2017-2018 school year, by implementing a revised data analysis protocol (The Atlas Protocol) and a school-wide data recording system (Data-At-A-Glance). This allowed us to more closely review impact of our instruction on student achievement. Our June data shows the following results, based on running records and end of module math assessments (% average difference from September in parenthesis): K-2 Running Records: 3-5 Running Records: 25% Level 1 (-21% ) 32% Level 1 (-22%) 14% Level 2 (-12%) 30% Level 2 (+14%) 31% Level 3 (+14%) 21% Level 3 (+1%) 30% Level 4 (+19%) 17% Level 4 (+7%) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  K-2 Math Assessments: 3-5 Math Assessments: 10% Level 1 (-12%) 51% Level 1 (-10%) 22% Level 2 (no change) 24% Level 2 (+4%) 34% Level 3 (+2%) 19% Level 3 (+4%) 34% Level 4 (+10%) 6% Level 4 (no change) Efforts we made in the 2017-2018 school year to impact teacher collaboration in deeper data analysis and data driven instructional planning include:  Additional common planning time  Professional development from the following on small group instruction: Instructional Coaches o o Educator Collaborative, LLC o Facilitation of the Number Talks and 5 Practices to include classroom lab sites and PD including peer feedback  Data Dives (Data analysis PLCs)  Colleague inter-visitations  Cycles of Lunch & Learn Priority Need: In order to continue growth, as evidenced above, continued opportunities for teachers to collaborate with their colleagues over data and its implications toward instruction will be provided to include, but not limited to:  Common planning periods and PLCs  Monday Data Dives o Access to PD from Instructional Coaches, Educator Collaborative, and Fountas and Pinnell On-Site Specialists o Review of data with administration  Showcase school visits To strengthen our collaboration across grades and teacher teams we have identified classrooms as lab sites to support teachers and encourage inter visitations and building capacity. Lab Sites have been identified for all of our school and district initiatives such as: 5 Mathmatical Practices, Number Talks, Guided Reading, Close Reading, Level Literacy Interventions, SIOP and Fundations. 2017-18 School Quality Guide: 79% of teachers say that teachers are eager to try new ideas. (Q1d) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  By June 2019, the percentage of students approaching, meeting, or exceeding the standards (levels 2, 3, and 4) will increase by 10% as a result of teacher team collaboration on the data-driven development and modification of daily lessons, in order to meet the learning needs of all learners in their classrooms, as evidenced by running record and summative math assessment data in grades K-2 and NYS ELA and Math scores in grades 3-5. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Regular data analysis to inform data-driven instruction All PreK-5th Grade Students Sept. 2018-June 2019  Teachers were trained to use the Atlas Protocol to analyze scholar work and reflect on teacher practices to impact scholar achievement outcomes.  Documenting, aggregating and tracking data across the school year on the Data-At-A-Glance forms Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  PreK - 5 Classroom Teachers  Math & Science Cluster  AIS/SETSS Providers Professional Development:  Data Dives - grade wide and school wide time devoted solely to reviewing and analyzing student data to determine instructional implications  Coaching Cycles - small group and 1:1 support for teachers in data analysis and data-driven instructional development. o Consultant facilitated PLCs focused on data-driven instruction including special focus on the SWD and ENL sub-population Sept. 2018-June 2019  All PreK-5 Classroom Teachers  Math & Science Cluster AIS/SETSS Providers  Administration  Instructional Coaches  Educator Collaborative, LLC Fountas & Pinnell On-Site Specialists Midpoint Progress Monitoring Teachers have been strengthening instructional capacity by modifying units of study based on mid-unit data analysis utilizing a data analysis protocol to identify trends. We have revised our protocol from the Tuning Protocol to the ATLAS Protocol, and use this data to inform modifications to the units, as well as to inform small group instruction. We have implemented school-wide Learning Walks, Instructional Rounds, and classroom inter-visitation lab-sites, as well as participate in a district-wide Teacher Rounds initiative.  All PreK-5 Classroom Teachers  Math & Science Cluster  AIS/SETSS Providers Sept. 2018-November/ December 2018 November 2018 - April/May 2019  Administration  Instructional Coaches  All Teaching Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Weekly common planning/C6 time for teacher teams devoted solely to reviewing and analyzing student data to determine instructional implications.  All PK-5th Grade Students Sept. 2018- June 2019  All PreK-5 Classroom Teachers  Math & Science Cluster  AIS/SETSS Providers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The School Leadership Team will consist of a cohort of parents representative of the families within the school community, serving as the voice of the families within the school community. The parent coordinator will create a sanctuary and support center in which families will learn the strategies that will aide in building a better home school partnership as well as provide information and resources to address familial and social issues. The Social Worker and Guidance Counselors will provide mental health and community based resources for assistance in dealing with issues. The construction of the new Montefiore Health Clinic will contribute to providing holistic health services and much needed health care. The Montefiore School Health Clinic is scheduled to open in 2019 at PS 100. The clinic will provide the following services: Medical Services (physical examinations, medical care, sick visits, asthma and diabetes management, vaccinations, etc.); Dental Services (dental screening, cleaning and sealants); Mental Health Services (behavioral/mental health screening, depression, counseling services, etc.) and Health Education. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Purchase of TCRWP Units of Study for Reading and Writing  Purchase of enVison Mathematics 2.0  Purchase of Fountas and Pinnell Guided Reading Classroom and Responsive Teaching teacher's resource text  Weekly common planning and C6 time  Access to a well rounded digital calendar of professional development around data analysis  ELA Instructional Coach  Math Instructional Coach  ULIT Reading Coach    Math and Science Cluster  AIS Provider  Consultant PD from Educator Collaborative, LLC  Montefiore School Health Program IEP Teacher SETSS Provider Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century X C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Student scores on Post Unit Assessments will improve in comparison to Pre Unit Assessment Students will score on or above grade level on rubrics indicating mastery of CCLS Aligned Unit goals, as measured at the end of each of the four School year Units. According to Charlotte Danielson’s Measures of Teacher Effectiveness teacher progress will be measured by each of the units of student, math topics and/or data-at-a-glance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assessments developed by the school assessment team, Teachers will Norm and triangulate data, Advance measure of teacher practice system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Results in our 2017-2018 School Environment Survey reveal 96% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, the principal/school leader encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. Our Administrative team have a fully functional system in place that encourages teachers to play integral roles in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. Our teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that systematically communicates a unified set of high expectations for all students and provide clear focused and effective feedback in guidance/advisement supports to ensure that students, including high-needs subgroups, own their educational experience and are prepared for the next level. Administration provides differentiated professional development to teachers based on their needs, student achievement and teacher performance. Many of the outside Professional Developments address Culturally Responsive Pedagogy, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention and Implicit Bias. Evidenced in our PD Binder with Agenda and Sign-Ins. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Priority Needs: Based on Advance feedback from observations we will focus on nurturing the professional growth of teachers and strengthen their practice in all Danielson components for the 2018-19 in planning and instruction and specifically Domain 3, to ensure every student demonstrates progress, a specific element within the Framework for Great Schools under Effective School Leadership. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have the opportunity to participate in a leadership role as a result there will be increased ownership and "buy in" on the part of teachers as measured by teacher participation and attendance at school events and activities. Teachers attending any outside PD are expected to turn-key information and build capacity within the school community. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Creating Risk Free Environments by means of: All Teachers and scholars Sept. 2018- June 2019 All members of the school Community ● Establishing Grade Leaders as members of an Instructional Team of teachers where the ideas and concerns of the staff are voiced and action plans are created as a result. This establishes a trust among different entities within the school environment. ● Administration having an Open Door Policy to form partnerships building support systems that close gaps in instruction. (Establishing trust between Administration and teachers) ● In collaboration with District 9, the school will participate in a 5 week challenge to stomp out bullying by teaching children about Cultural Awareness and Sensitivity through a Multicultural Dance Festival. Our Respect for All Coordinator will organize Student Council to lead Town Hall conversations about respect and dignity. ● Form Teams of teachers and educational assistants from every grade to represent and run different committees school-wide. (Including, Professional Development Committee, MOSL committee, School Culture Committee, PBIS, SLT, SIT, School Wellness Council, Student Council, Crisis Intervention, Attendance, and the Instructional team.) ● We will invite staff to utilize their network of influence to build our instructional community. This will be done via career fairs and field trips. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  November-June 2019 Administration; classroom teachers Teaching staff All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 ● Teachers, Paraprofessionals and Parents are encouraged to present in our Annual School retreat. ● Teachers are encouraged to provide Professional Development to peers to improve practice and plan for student achievement and progress both this school year and next school year. ● Teachers are encouraged to plan their own inter-visitations. ● In collaboration with the Office of School Wellness Programs, Mr. Abshire will lead a move to improve demo lesson lab site. (PS 199 is an all star school for 2017-18 and 2018-19). The principal serves as mentor /supervisor for teachers participating in both traditional and non-traditional administration programs. (i.e. LEAP, Teacher Leaders, Paraprofessional Leaders) Select Teachers and Paraprofessionals Annually 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers initiate and implement identified areas of strength to share information in professional development forum. Administration monitors and organize opportunities for teacher and parents to attend teacher-led events. Principal and Select Teachers and paraprofessionals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are vital to have input in School Safety Committee Meetings, School Leaderships Team decisions and during monthly Parent Teacher Association meetings. Parents have a forum for input through workshops, assemblies, electronic communication and collaborative environment opportunities. The school allocates funds and resources to involve families in and outside of the school building (via instructional materials, events, games and the like). Families will have access to computers in the school community room 105 to support 21st century learning and home-school connection. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monthly instructional meetings with Grade Leaders to review and revise school goals implementation. Support systems will include Lunch and Learns, differentiated Professional Development (including virtual professional development: WeTeachNYC) based on teacher needs aligned to teacher professional goals and school goals, we revise the master schedule to foster continuous teachers intervisitation, Staff and parents Annual School retreat, ongoing revision of curricular units, time allotted for learning walks and feedback. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Staff that assume leadership roles will have attendance sheets from their interactions to add to their portfolio of work (ie: tenure binder). Leaders will be acknowledged publicly at staff professional development sessions. Teachers who turn-key outside PD, will be logged in our schools' PD calendar evidenced by agenda and sign in. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance MOTP data, agendas of teacher led meetings and participant signatures. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths : As a school we work diligently with Parents and the community to support the academic and personal growth of students and adults. We engage in effective planning of events (Bring your Mom to School Day and Breakfast for Fathers) and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strengths and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 2017-18 School Quality Guide: 98% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h) All parent written communication and school-wide loud speaker announcements are delivered in English and Spanish. ClassDojo posts can be automatically translated into a parents preferred language. Priority Needs: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  We plan to expand outreach to parents so they may better understand and participate in their children’s education. Parents will be encouraged to participate through the School Leadership Team, Community Based Organizations, and Class Parent Volunteers (for field trips) as a means to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional development health) to support scholar success. Our PTA Executives are very active in our school community. 2017-18 School Quality Guide: 60% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. (Q4a Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 100% of our parents will be invited to school events such as parent teacher conferences, Math and Literacy events, Perfect Attendance celebrations, Open school night and be given opportunities to visit classrooms for events such as author celebrations. As a result by June 2019, the number of parents responding that they have been “asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often” will increase by 10% as measured by the New York City Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Parental Attendance to Open School night and Parent Teacher conferences will be taken and teacher follow up will be encouraged and monitored. All Families of students who attend P.S. 199x ● Grade teams create a monthly newsletter to give parents academic information and news each month. ● Describe to families at the beginning of the year the curriculum goals for ELA and Math, as well as expectations for the school year. ● Provide families with regular feedback through the homeschool notebook and Classroom Dojo of their children’s level of achievement for each unit along with strategies for parents to implement at home to help their children improve. ● At regular intervals, through parent workshops, we will explain the significance of different achievement levels and learning rubrics to families. ● Provide families with clear guidelines for communicating with classroom teacher, through telephone, email, Home- school notebook, Tuesday meetings, monthly activities calendar, and through Class Dojo and Newsletters August 2018 to June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ALL staff will contribute to providing parent feedback and information in all facets of scholar learning and achievement. Our parent coordinator will serve as a bridge between school and home for our parents and students and SLT. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ● Parents will receive monthly professional development based on the Learning environment survey and School survey ● Our School Culture committee will plan family nights. (Game night, Movie Night, etc.) Midpoint Progress Monitoring: Our next Learning Walk will include parent participants, in which we will visit classrooms during instructional time. Future PTA meetings will focus on the progress monitoring of areas of improvement as evidenced on our 2016-2017 NYC Learning Environment Survey. A sample parent survey is being reviewed aligned to the Framework for Great Schools and NYC Learning Environment Survey. Students will participate in school sponsored basketball program on Friday afternoons. Project Arts Afterschool program. Parents; SLT; PTA Administration; SLT; PTA March-June 2019 3rd, 4th and 5th Grade Students Nov. 2018- May 2019 Administration, Physical Education Teacher, three classroom teachers. Fall 18/ Parent Coordinator All Parents Summer19 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Parents will be invited to Holiday Events, Attendance Celebrations, PBIS Events and more. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Families are invited to participate in events held by programs, some of which their children perform or present their work throughout the program. Montefiore Health Clinic will support family needs for health care. SCAN afterschool program will continue to invite families to events and employ members of the school community to their staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources include coaches to support curriculum nights and professional development for parents and teachers and Parent Coordinator. Technology for Class Dojo and grade newsletters. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School X Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, classroom teachers will invite parents to attend a meeting or event at the school, at least two times. Parent attendance at Parent-Teacher Association meetings will increase by 5% in January 2019 and thereafter 5% by June 2019. There will also be a 5% increase in participation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Surveys, Classroom Dojo Correspondence, Attendance at monthly PTA meetings, Parent teacher conferences and events. Home/School Notebook Correspondence Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Running Records -1:1 Conferences -Predictive Assessments -Pre & Post Unit Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) -Use of different modes of learning (visual, hands-on, audio, etc.) -Afterschool Title I & III Programs to solidify topics taught during the school day. -Cycle of short and extended responses. Leveled Literacy Intervention -NYSState ELA -Summer Enrichment Program Baseline assessments -Envision Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Guided Reading -RTI 1:1 When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day - Extended Programs -Peer tutoring -1:1 conferences Computers -Focus groups -During school and Extended Programs -Topic Tests -Bridges -Peer Tutoring -Benchmarks -Fluency Quizzes -Predictive Assessments -NYSMathematics -Pre & Post Unit Assessments -5 Practices and Number Talks -1:1 conferences Computers -Summer Enrichment Program Science Fair -Focus groups -During school and Extended Programs -Foss Kits -Peer Tutoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48 Social Studies Pre & Post Unit Assessments Multicultural Fair Passport to Social Studies -1:1 conferences -Watch videos to reinforce topics taught -Study text -During school and Extended Programs -Peer Tutoring -Watch videos to reinforce topics taught on the computer -Counseling Services 1:1 and within small groups. During school At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher referral -PBIS -IEP mandated -Respect for All -Parent request -Classroom DojoResults -Home-School Notebook -RTI-Leveled Literacy Intervention -Peer Tutoring -Summer in the City Enrichment Program Using New Computers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 218 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our social worker will help support family members with regular home visits, counseling sessions and workshops. There is a DOE family worker assigned to the 1605 Nelson Avenue shelter. This person attends the bi-weekly attendance meetings. We provide uniforms, book bags and food to our new comer Students in Temporary Housing and host food and clothing drives twice annually to support needs of our Students In Temporary Housing. The principal visited 1605 Nelson Avenue Shelter for a meet and greet. Attendees were awarded 100% attendance certificates and there was a introductory Individualized Education Plan presentation. The DOE Family Worker, assigned to 1605 Nelson, attends bi-weekly attendance meetings with school staff. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Does not apply 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Does not apply 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Does not apply 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: We have a three step strategic hiring process: 1. Interview, 2. Demonstration Lesson, 3. Administrative Interview. The school leader will continue to work closely Retention: In order to retain teachers we ensure that Professional Development is individualized to support teacher growth and development. Teachers are assigned most often due to preference and major areas of strength. High Quality PD: All provided Professional Development will be aligned to city-wide and district expectations and targeted for areas such as, but not limited to: Guided Reading, Leveled Literacy Intervention, Small Group Strategy Instruction, Close Reading, Number Talks, 5 Practices. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). By June 2018, 100% of teachers will engage in professional development that supports the development of a safe, student-centered learning environment which embraces the diversity, needs, and culture of all learners. In alignment with the Chancellor’s initiative to advance equity now, we will continue to examine and refine social-emotional and instructional practices to provide highly engaging curriculum that ensures equity and excellence for all of our students, by providing opportunities for professional development in the following areas: 1. Classroom Best Practices o Danielson 3B o Danielson 3C o Culturally Responsive Pedagogy (The Educator Collaborative) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  o Showcase Schools intervisitation o Instructional Rounds 2. Literacy 1. Fundations for Tier I and Tier II RtI support o Unpacking units of study for Teachers College Reading and Writing o Showcase Schools Intervisitation 3. Math o Bronx Field Support Center Math Routines o Showcase Schools Intervisitation 4. Students with Disabilities o Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) to adapt as appropriate the content, methodology, and/or delivery of teaching practices to address the specific needs of students with disabilities I.E.P Quality Writing (Through the District and our School based Support Team) ICT with G & R Inclusive Group, LLC o o o RSE-TASC -Regional Special Education Technical Assistance Support Center 5. English Language Learners o Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol with Dr Trejo o RBERN with Dr. Nancy Cloud 6. Gifted and Talented o Gifted Education Conference at Rutgers o Designing Instruction to Challenge All Students 7. Academic Interventions o Leveled Literacy Intervention o Bridges math o Great Leaps o iReady 8. Social Emotional Learning to build PBIS o TCIS o Samford Harmony-a social-emotional program that builds strong classroom relationships and supportive learning communities. The goal of Harmony is to integrate the evidenced-based strategies to promote the development of today’s students into respectful, compassionate, and caring adults for the future. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). All professional development is offered to Pre-K teachers. Pre-K teachers have been trained on methods to best support pre-school students in their developmental setting. Throughout the year, teachers will receive support from the Cffice of Early Childhood education via an Early Childhood Coordinator to ensure that best practices are always taking place. The Assistant Principals provides our Pre-K families with a “Transitioning to Kindergarten” workshop in which the NYC DOE instructional expectations are communicated. This workshop serves as a forum for parents to receive information about the support systems that the school has in place in order to ensure that students make a smooth transition to Kindergarten. Pre-K teachers are expected to provide Kindergarten Teachers with all pertinent data, including, the authentic assessment summaries. In order to ascertain that the record transfer process is clear and cohesive. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. One unique feature of our school is that we have Distributive Leadership. The School Instructional Team is involved in all decision making aspects of the schools curricula. The Instructional Team consists of two instructional coaches, the administrative cabinet and one representative from each constituency within the school, including a teacher Grade Leader for each grade. This composition of the team ensures equity and input from all stakeholders. All assessments are fully aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards to ensure that all students are making adequate yearly progress. As a result, Unit Assessments will be holistic, including content and literacy. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a-Part 3 & 4, 5B-Part 3 & 4, 5c-Part 3 & 4, 5d-Part 3 &4, Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 699,828 X 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 16,979 104,439 89,673 27,470 0 4,420,235 X X X X X 5e- Part 3 & 4, Section 6. Section 6 Section 6, 5a-Part 3 &4,5c-Part 3 & 4, 5d-Part 3 &4, 5e- Part 3 & 4. 5a-Part 3 & 4, 5B-Part 3 & 4, 5c-Part 3 & 4, 5d-Part 3 &4, 5e- Part 3 & 4, Section 6. 5a-Part 3 & 4, Section 6. 5a-Part 3 & 4, 5B-Part 3 & 4, 5c-Part 3 & 4, 5d-Part 3 &4, 5e- Part 3 & 4, Section 6. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X199, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Parents are always welcomed at 09X199 because we have an open door policy. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 199x-The Shakespeare School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the Central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● invite parent's to the School District's Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X199, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television and/or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school and/or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules by practicing the 3r's (being respectful, responsible and ready to learn) ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: The focus groups are ELLs categorized as SIFE (Students with Interrupted Formal Education), Newcomers and students at the emerging and transitional levels of English language proficiency. Schedule: The program is expected to run from September 26, 2018 through April 10, 2019 on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. A total of approximately 45 sessions will be held during the school year. The language of instruction will be English. Two certified ENL teachers and three certified bilingual teachers will provide instruction. An Assistant Principal will supervise this program. The supervisor’s salary will be paid with other monies and will be of no cost to Title III. PS 199 will consolidate funds with Title 1. In addition to the mandated ENL units in accordance to Commissioner Regulations Part 154 and our school-wide Language Allocation Policy, the Title III monies will provide P.S. 199x with the opportunity to conduct supplemental English language development for English Language Learners (ELLs), workshops for parents and professional development for teachers. The funds will be used to enhance the educational opportunities of ELLs recently arrived in the United States as well as ELLs who scored at the emerging and transitional levels of English proficiency in the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). The Title III additional resources will assist the school in creating opportunities for ELLs to improve their English language acquisition by developing their social and academic vocabulary, their reading comprehension, and their listening and speaking skills. All pertinent documents, including student attendance will be kept in the main office by the Payroll Secretary. Analysis of the available data indicates that our ELL population is in need of additional support in the areas of reading, writing, listening and speaking. The NYSESLAT and the NYSITELL scores indicate that 36% percent of ELLs enrolled in grades K- 5, scored at the entering and emerging levels of proficiency. Twenty six percent scored at the transitional level and 38 percent scored at the expanding level of English proficiency. The After School Title III program will provide direct instruction using flexible grouping to 100 ELLs in grades one to five. There will be 4 classes, and the projected teacher student ration is 20:1. Invited students are currently at the entering, emerging and transitional levels as per the NYSESLAT. The focus of the transitional group will be to acquire academic language and reach proficiency in the NYSESLAT. Content based lessons using ESL methodology and the SIOP model will be planned and delivered. Grammar and language function instruction are integrated and designed to meet the specific language needs of each student. The entering and emerging groups will strengthen their social and academic language by developing their phonemic awareness, social 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and academic vocabulary, reading skills, fluency and comprehension. Teachers will plan their lessons using language and content objectives. Contextualization is embedded in all aspects of instruction; colorful posters and books with supportive illustrations as well as scaffolding techniques will be used to make content more accessible for the students. Students will read a wide variety of informational texts as well as personal narratives and other reading genres. Teachers will utilize technology to impart instruction. Students will use Smart-Boards to engage in interactive activities that will build their English language proficiency in all four modalities. For example, language practice games provide an engaging, enjoyable atmosphere for language practice; thus providing a low affective filter for all students. These activities are specifically designed to increase comprehensible input. Teachers will use Power Language, a content-based instructional program that uses grade-level content as the vehicle for language development. This program contains standards based lessons that target the four language modalities. It includes Digital resources, level appropriate books, and audio of all texts to model fluency, poems and visuals are used to support comprehension and academic vocabulary instruction. In addition, teachers will provide students with cognitively engaging tasks which will expose all learners to interactive read-alouds in order to emulate appropriate enunciation and think alouds. These tasks will also offer the opportunity for all learners to read fiction and non-fiction books at their reading level allowing them to increase their content vocabulary in English. In addition, teachers will use "Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT" language exercises published by Attanasio and Associates. These instructional materials are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards . Using a results oriented approach, teachers will assess students in order to measure steady progress in all language modalities. Informal and formal assessments such as conferences, informal observations, teacher-made tests and the assessments included in the Power Language Program as well as CCLS aligned checklists anchored in the language standards will be utilized as assessment tools. Mastery oriented feedback will be anchoring all reading and writing conferences with the students. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: The focus groups are ELLs categorized as SIFE (Students with Interrupted Formal Education), Newcomers and students at the emerging and transitional levels of English language proficiency. The school will complement the cost of Ttile III program with other funding sources. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: In light of the high linguistic demands from our English Language Learners, teachers working under the Title III program will be supported with professional development in the following areas: Data Analysis, Vocabulary development and SIOP . Another component of the Professional Development program is for teachers to periodically meet and engage in an academic discourse around best instructional practices and data analysis under the guidance of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part C: Professional Development the Title III supervisor. Workshops include but are not limited to the following: Differentiating Instruction for ELLs, SIOP, Analyzing the NYSESLAT data and the instructional and planning implications. Professional journals and articles from various sources are shared and discussed during common planning and lunch and learn sessions in order to allow our pedagogues to further develop their skill set as teachers of ELLs. In addition, in order to address the needs of our instructional staff, a professional development team coordinates all workshops at the school level. Both Administrators and Instructional Coaches are members of the PD team. Throughout the school year, school administrators and both Instructional Coaches conduct workshops on various topics. At the school level, classroom inter visitations are planned in order to facilitate the sharing of best instructional practices. The professional development plan is delivered as follows: Analyzing the 2018 NYSESLAT Data - September, 2018 - Presenter: Ms. Castillo, ENL Teacher Teaching Academic Content and Literacy to English Language Learners - December 2018 - Presenter: Mr. Allegretto, ENL Teacher SIOP Strategies- February, 2019 - Presenter: Ms. Abreu, Instructional Coach rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: At the Shakespeare School we believe that parental and community involvements are essential elements to our students’ academic and social growth and success. Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. Therefore, parents are given many opportunities in which they can play an active role in their child's education and be part of the school community. As part of our on-going outreach efforts, parents are invited and encouraged to be active participants of all school related activities such as, our Book Parade which takes place in early September to launch our Literacy Program . This event is a great venue for parents of ELLs to be integrated into the school community. Other events that take place throughout the year targeting this population are: · diversity. · Story day. · Math Game Nights- Translators will be available upon request The Annual Multicultural Festival, which will be held in December&nbsp;to celebrate Literature based events such the Parent Book Club &amp; Read to your child Pajama 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Out Literacy Night for our Bilingual Students&nbsp; called: Cuentos y Más – (Story Blended learning for Bilingual Students – Teaching parents how to navigate the World-Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · Telling) · Wide-Web in order to access resources for their children . In addition to the Parent events listed above, we will offer other workshops for parents on various topics. These workshops will take place throughout the fall, winter and spring of the 2018-2019 academic year. Each workshop will last one hour. All parents of English language learners enrolled in the Title III program will be invited to participate in these workshops. Our target is to have 100% of parents attend these workshops. Workshops will be presented in English and in Spanish. Translation will be made available upon request for other languages. Invitation letters to these workshops will be written in three languages (English, Spanish and French) as well. The workshops will be conducted by an Assistant Principal, and/or the Instructional coaches. Informational materials will be distributed during these sessions and refreshments for parents will be served. Workshops: New York State Standardized Tests - January 30, 2019 - Presenter Maria Abreu, Literacy Coach How can parents support Language Development? February 26, 2019- Presenter: Ms. Bonnet, Bilingual Teacher Literacy Night - March 19, 2019 - Hosted by the ENL/ TBE staff Copies of the agenda, attendance, letters of invitation and all other pertinent documentation will be on file in the Principal's Office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, 3. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name The Shakespeare School Borough Bronx School Number 199 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Yasmin Quezada Coach Maria Abreu ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Joseph Allegretto Celeste Cast Teacher/Subject Area Myrna Salguero, Special Ed. Teacher/Subject Area Magaly Fernandez, Bil. Teacher Related-Service Provider Jane Pagan Superintendent Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Assistant Principal Sabrina Cruz & Meghan Shore Coach Samantha Ginsberg School Counselor Raiza Santana Parent Cindy Cacpata Parent Coordinator Sandra Lopez Field Support Center Staff Member Jannet Franco Other (Name and Title) Maurice Lauriano, Community Or C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 5 2 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 750 Total number of ELLs 219 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 29.20% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2000-01 1 1 2 1 4 1 3 1 K 1 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 5 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 6 0 0 0 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses different forms of assessments to drive instruction across the different programs. We use the Fountas and Pinnell (F&P) Assessment System which assesses letter recognition, letter sounds, word recognition, and students' instructional and independent reading levels three times per year. i-Ready Diagnostic is used to asses student performance across the key domains in reading and mathematics. It supports teachers to identify gaps in literacy and math; thus allowing them to plan differentiated lessons. In addition, students are given pre and post assessments at the beginning and end of the units of study. Estrellita is used in the Bilingual classes to assess student literacy in Spanish. Estrellita assesses phonemic 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  awareness, phonics, and fluency. The data indicates that ELLs in general fall below their grade level peers in both reading and writing. Therefore, basic English language skills must be emphasized through daily practice in speaking, listening, reading and writing. The data gathered is used to create individual goals for students, plan instruction, and create focus groups for RTI and after school and/or Saturday programs . 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? As a school, it is a priority to provide every student with equity and excellence in the curriculum. We are able to achieve this by setting benchmarks throughout the school year in order to monitor academic progress for every student. At the beginning of the year, early fall, the assessment team collaborates with the school principal in order to select the appropriate assessments to meet the needs of all our students including SWD, and ELLs. Each teacher receives a yearly calendar outlining each assessment and benchmark date. Grade level teams along with the Instructional coaches, the administrators, and the ENL teachers meet at ever benchmark date to closely analyze data and delineate steps. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to measure student academic growth, The NYC Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) Performance Assessments in English Language Arts (ELA) is administered to students in September to establish baseline scores for our students. This assessment is administered at the end of the school year to measure student growth in ELA. In addition, the school uses the NYSESLAT and ELA data to measure ELLs' literacy development. As a school community we have established a culture of self-evaluation on a yearly basis. We begin with our Parent-Staff School Retreat every June. We revise and make new plans for the upcoming school year. Based on students' data, we assess the programs that worked and those that did not. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At PS 199x, we follow the 3 Tier Response to Intervention (RTI) Protocol. The teacher uses research based curriculum and supports students who are not meeting the set benchmarks using small group instruction. The teacher plans targeted support for students in these small groups as per their level of competence and their level of English acquisition. Strategic grouping is a staple in daily plans. Students who continue to experience academic difficulties in ELA are further supported using The Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention system. It is a short term intervention, which supplements classroom literacy teaching. Students have also access to iReady Online Intervention for Math. Both systems provide teachers with daily access to student data; thus allowing teachers to monitor the intervention effectiveness. If a student is not making sufficient academic progress after having been supported using Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions, the student may be referred to the Response to Intervention Team for possible Tier III interventions. The team will meet with the parent and all of its key members in order to provide an individualized intervention plan for the students. The child maybe eligible for an educational evaluation. Every effort will be made before starting the initial evaluation process. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At the start of the school year we review data from state exams, Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessments and unit ELA assessments. Based on the data, we determine the needs of each student and plan appropriate instruction. It is our objective to ensure that all ELLs receive high quality Tier 1 core instruction. Our teachers are well trained in planning and delivering instruction to ELLs using ESL methodology. Our staff differentiate instruction as per students' language proficiency level, learning styles and current level of academic performance. The ELL team examines achievement at the class level and periodically measures students' progress to identify the competencies that need further intervention. If after receiving high quality Tier 1 instruction, ELLs do not show sufficient progress on specific skills, they are provided with additional intensive targeted intervention. The RTI Team meets every two weeks or as needed to review student progress and assess whether the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  intervention provided meets the needs of the student. Based on this data, The RTI Team determines whether the student continues to receive Tier 1 instruction or receives Tier 2 or Tier 3 intervention. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. To evaluate the effectiveness of the current ELL programs to serve the needs of the ELL population, the school examines ELLs’ performance in formal and informal assessments such as the NYSESLAT, NYS Tests, teacher observations and conferences. The success of the programs and the intervention provided are measured by whether or not the students are making adequate yearly progress (AYP). Based on this data, the ELL team identifies the strengths of the services provided and the areas in need of improvement. According to the spring 2017 NYSESLAT and the 2017-2018 NYSITELL data, 38 percent of ELLs scored at the expanding level. Twenty six percent of ELLs scored at the transitioning level; eighteen percent of ELLs scored at the emerging level, and eighteen percent scored at the entering level of English proficiency. The majority of ELLs in grades 1-5 scored at the expanding and transitioning levels. The percentage of students scoring at the commanding level in the NYSESLAT increased. Fourteen percent of NYSESLAT test takers scored at the commanding level. The number of students scoring at the expanding and transitioning levels increased and there was a drastic decrease in the number of students scoring at the entering and emerging levels in grades 1-5. The data of the past 3 years indicates that there has been an increase in the percentage of students scoring at the transitioning and expanding levels. The data also shows that the number of long term ELLs has decreased. Currently, there are no long term ELLs enrolled at P.S. 199x Upon examining the spring 2017 NYSESLAT and the NYSITELL results in each of the four language modalities, the ELL team found that students’ areas of weakness were writing and reading. Therefore, the Common Core Standard based units of study have integrated reading, writing, and the content areas. Language development is embedded in content area instruction. Writing instruction includes shared and interactive writing as well as independent writing. During the course of the year, ELLs will be exposed to a variety of writing genres across all subject areas. Performance tasks were created for each unit of study to assess mastery and diagnose needs. ELLs did not fare well in the ELA. The information gained from an in depth analysis of the ELA results will be used to plan instruction and allocate resources. Guided reading groups will provide ELLs with the opportunity to interact with a variety of texts at their reading levels. Students will be explicitly taught academic vocabulary and reading strategies in order to increase their comprehension. Students in the entering and emerging groups will strengthen their academic language by developing their phonemic awareness, vocabulary, reading skills, fluency, and comprehension. Posters and books with supportive illustrations as well as scaffolding techniques will be used to make content accessible for the students. They will also be able to use SMART Boards to engage in interactive activities that will build their English language proficiency. For example, language practice games provide an engaging, enjoyable atmosphere for language practice. These activities are specifically designed to increase comprehensible input. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Early Fall the ENL Teachers, along with the Assistant Principal in charge of English as a New Language, provide all staff members with the NYSESLAT scores. In addition, the ENL Team provides all staff members with a professional development session on “How to use the NYSESLAT scores and the implications for planning and instruction". The LAP team meets periodically to support teachers of ELLs further use the NYSESLAT and the NYSITELL scores to inform their instruction. Furthermore, teachers come together as a team and analyze student work mid-way through the unit and at the end as well. The structured work around “Looking at student work” allows teachers to have data to make instructional and curricular changes. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students enrolled in the Free Standing ENL Program receive services by two certified ENL teachers through a Push-In /Pull out model - In monolingual classes with a large population of ELLs, the ENL teachers and the classroom teacher co-teach. In this model, a certified ENL teacher works in collaboration with the classroom teacher to provide English instruction using ESL methodology in the academic content areas such as math, science, social studies and English Language Arts, among other subjects. Teachers co-plan, co-deliver and individualize instruction for all students in the class. The“Pull-Out” Model - In this model, students who scored at the entering or emerging level in the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL and are enrolled in monolingual classes are pulled out of their regular classroom to receive ENL instruction by a certified ENL teacher. Students are grouped in heterogeneous groups. "ELLs benefit in these settings when they can experience "authentic" communication with fluent English-speaking models and are exposed to a rigorous academic program." b. TBE program. If applicable. Our school has six transitional bilingual classes. There is a bilingual class in each grade. Research indicates that there is a strong and positive correlation between literacy in the native language and learning English (Clay, 1993) and that the degree of children’s native language proficiency is a strong predictor of their English language development (Snow, Burns, & Griffin, 1998). Students in the TBE program are heterogeneously grouped by grade with different English proficiency levels as well as different Spanish proficiency levels. This program is designed to offer the students grade-level academic work in their native language so that students maintain academic progress while developing English proficiency. In this program, content area instruction is taught in the students’ native language. English is taught using ESL methodology to assist ELL students in attaining English proficiency so they are prepared to later enter the all-English mainstream general education classes. Teachers in the TBE differentiate instruction, teaching in the native language for different amounts of time depending on the students’ English proficiency levels. Students at the entering and emerging levels are taught for 60% of the day in their native language and for 40% in English; Transitioning ELLs are taught in English half of the time (50%); Expanding students receive most of their instruction in English (75%) and 25% in the native language. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the Transitional Bilingual Program /ENL Program instruction is delivered through the workshop model using a balanced literacy approach. Students at the entering, emerging and low transitioning levels in a TBE class receive 1 unit of Native Language Arts (NLA) instruction per week (mini-lesson and independent work/conferring), 2 units of ENL per week, 1 unit of writing in the native language, 1 unit of math instruction mostly in the native language and forty-five minutes of enrichment classes such as art, music, dance, physical education and health. Each day, a 45-minute period (1 unit per week) is dedicated to social studies and science, which are taught mostly in the native language. Expanding students receive 1 unit per week of English Language Arts (ELA) instruction per week, 1 unit per week of writing (mini-lesson and independent work/conferring), 1 unit of ENL per week. They also receive ninety minutes per day of math instruction (2 units per week) in Spanish and 45 minutes of enrichment classes such as art, music, dance, physical education and technology. A 45-minute period a day (1 unit 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  per week) is dedicated to social studies or science, which are taught in English using ESL methodology. Both programs adhere to the mandated number of ENL minutes as per CR Part 154 (360 minutes per week of ENL instruction for students performing at the entering and emerging levels and , and 180 minutes for students performing at the high transitioning and expanding levels). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our Transitional Bilingual Program, content area instruction is delivered by the classroom teachers as well as content areas specialists who support the classroom teachers. In the beginning stages of English language development 60% of instructional time takes place in the student’s native language and 40% in English. As the students develop fluency in English, instructional time in English increases. Grade-level academic work aligned with the Common Core Standards is provided in the student’s native language, so that the student maintains academic progress while developing English proficiency. All teachers incorporate ESL methodologies, scaffolding techniques and differentiate instruction to make content accessible to the students. Free Standing English as a New Language (ENL) - Students in this program receive all instruction in English and the required ENL units of instruction according to his or her English proficiency level. Students are heterogeneously mixed with the wider school population. The classroom teachers and the ENL teachers articulate weekly, or more often if necessary, for planning and to collaborate on instruction to support academic growth and second language acquisition. Flexible groupings, differentiated instruction and instructional scaffolding are incorporated into the workshop model to ensure academic success. Bilingual libraries, visuals, media center, books on tape and other materials are used to increase language development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Formal and informal assessments are used to monitor student progress. These include Estrellita, DWA, and pre and post unit assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The Common Core Standards require that students read and comprehend complex texts which can be a daunting task for ELLs who have difficulty mastering the kinds of academic language needed to access these texts. Some of our ELLs have below grade-level literacy in their native language or have no formal or limited formal education prior to enrolling in an American school. This is particularly challenging to ELLs as well as teachers who may not have the necessary training to best address the needs of these students. To close the achievement gap it is the goal of the school to train all teachers so that every teacher has the knowledge and skills to meet the unique needs of ELLs. a. Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) require additional support to facilitate their integration into the school system. Our students with interrupted formal education (SIFE), receive small group instruction from either their classroom teacher or an Academic Intervention Specialist (AIS), using Fundations, Power Language program and attend the After-School Program. Teachers use extra-linguistic cues to embed language in meaningful contexts. In addition, Language Power provides differentiated English language development activities in the four language modalities. b. The school offers the following support services to newcomers: extensive vocabulary instruction through the use of visuals and a computer based language development program, an after school program funded by Title III and Academic Intervention Services AIS). Individual writing and reading conferences, read alouds, choral reading and shared reading are used to develop the four language modalities. In addition, the school provides opportunities to involve the children’s families and encourages them to support their children with their native language, which strengthens their overall language development. Parents are invited to attend the monthly parent workshops and the Parent Coordinator provides support and information regarding the school and the community. c. ELLs Receiving Service 5 to 6 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Years - data shows there are 28 students with 4-6 years of service in our school. The school is committed to making sure that these students do not become long term ELLs and continue to make Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP). Therefore, the school provides the following support: extended day, differentiated instruction, ongoing assessment, small group instruction, AIS support and academic enrichment programs. Teachers scaffold the curriculum using varied media to convey key concepts. Additionally, the school provides students with targeted invention materials to support student learning -- Language Power and Fundations. d .Long Term ELLs (completed 6 years.) - Currently, there are no long-term ELLs. However, should there be any, a rigorous ENL program will be implemented to address the students' needs. The following interventions will be in place to support the academic growth of long term ELLs. Teachers will provide this specific population with a small group environment in which the affective filter is low; hence its conduciveness for second language acquisition. Students will use Language Power, which support language acquisition. They will engage in a series of activities geared to promoting language acquisition such as shared reading and writing. Shared reading is an instructional technique specifically beneficial to ELLs because of the high level of support provided by the teacher. e. Former ELLs who reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT are provided with support as they transition into mainstream classes. They receive 0.5 unit of ENL per week. These students also receive small group instruction utilizing a variety of methodologies that address the Common Core Learning Standards. In addition, these students will continue to have testing accommodations such as separate location, time extension and bilingual dictionaries to support them in class and state tests. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? This school strives to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs by making sure that all students have access to a high standard academic content curriculum. Rigor is maintained by ensuring that all ELL-SWDs receive curricula materials that are aligned to CCLS for the grade levels. Leveled libraries with books aligned with the units of study are used to ensure access to the current curriculum. Content and language instruction will be supported by the use of ESL methodologies, scaffolding and the SIOP model. Conferences and modeling through think alouds, use of graphic organizers, questioning and discussion techniques and teaching vocabulary in context will support both language development and content knowledge. When necessary, teachers provide non-linguistic representation of words while engaging in a "think-aloud" that helps students identify key components of the visual and their relationship to the new word. Vocabulary is crucial to reading comprehension. Therefore, ELL-SWD will receive direct instruction in word meaning and in the strategies used to learn new words. Teachers will plan lessons that offer multiple exposures to new words and opportunities to use them in different contexts. In addition, technology is used in the classrooms to enhance instruction and meet the needs of ELLs. Every classroom is equipped with at least two computers. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers meet during their PLC to common plan standards aligned lessons. During these meetings teachers of students with disabilities have access to their IEPs and take their individual goals for second language acquisition and academic achievement into consideration. As The Academic Intervention Specialist (AIS) provides instruction in reading strategies to help students progress academically. There is ongoing collaboration between the ICT teacher, the classroom teacher and the ENL teachers to make sure that the students' needs are being met. The IEP team meets regularly to review IEPs, evaluate placement, student progress, and instruction. Based on the data, students are sometimes mainstreamed into general education for some subjects. In addition, un-graded groups have been formed and students are grouped according to their language proficiency to meet the diverse needs of ELLs. Language Power, The Teachers College Reading and Writing Curriculum, Units of Study and Fundations are used to provide literacy and content instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  After analyzing the data from the New York State English Language Arts and NYS math tests, it is clear that ELLs are performing below their peers in both tests. The findings indicate that the school needs to strengthen its instructional practices to meet the needs of ELLs. The school has already provided teachers with training on the use of the SIOP, sheltered Instructional Protocol to further support the instruction for our ELLs. As a school, we are expected to provide equal access to quality instruction; therefore teachers support students in their individual needs using, guided reading, small focused math group including the active use of math manipulatives, hands on activities and the use of technology to provide ongoing differentiated support. ELL students are taught reading strategies in small groups and a variety of instructional materials and mythologies are used to support their learning. Current units of study have been designed to align the content areas with reading and writing to support both language development and content knowledge. Students in the lower grades receive explicit phonics instruction in Spanish using the Estrellita Curriculum. All of these targeted interventions are offered in the language as per the class composition of each class. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school will continue using Language Power, a program that includes listening, speaking, reading, and writing activities to support ongoing language development. It consists of three levels and each level differentiates for a range of abilities, as all language learners are unique. In addition, we will be implementing the Teachers College Reading and Writing program. The Teachers College Reading and Writing Program is an ELA curriculum which will be in full effect in the fall of 2018. This curriculum supports reading and writing development for all students, including English Language Learners. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA. We will keep the bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. In order to raise the standards for all ELLs, all school programs and activities are open to ELLs. ELLs are invited to participate in the Title III After School Program and extracurricular activities. ELLs participate in the Title III program as well as the Title I program three times a week after school. ENL teachers provide instruction in a small group environment in which the affective filter is low, hence its conduciveness for second language acquisition. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Research has shown that information that is embedded in context allows English Language Learners to understand and undertake more cognitively demanding tasks. Therefore, each classroom in the bilingual program is enriched with bilingual libraries and a large selection of books in Spanish and English. In TBE classrooms charts are posted in both English and Spanish. In the ENL program, students use bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. All classrooms have extensive libraries. Our school has a state-of the-art technology lab where students read online books at their independent reading level. All classrooms are equipped with SMART Boards which enhance instruction and learning, and every classroom has at least two computers and laptops available to students. The school provides students with targeted intervention materials to support student learning. ELLs have access to a wide variety of materials specifically designed for ELLs: Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Language Power 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Each classroom in the bilingual program is enriched with bilingual libraries. Teachers deliver instruction of the content areas in the native language. In TBE classrooms charts are posted in both English and Spanish. In the ENL program students use bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. Teachers also use visuals to scaffold instruction and make content accessible. Books in Spanish and other languages are available in the school library. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  As a school, careful consideration is given to age and grade level in order for each student to be appropriately placed. Each of our common core aligned units of study is planned with strict fidelity to the grade level expectations. In addition, each classroom in the bilingual program is enriched with bilingual libraries and a large selection of books in Spanish and English. In TEB classrooms charts are posted in both English and Spanish. In the ENL program, students use bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. Students have access to digital literacy using MyON. This is an award-winning personalized literacy program that incorporates: A state-of-the art learning platform for reading online books using at their independent reading level. The school provides students with targeted intervention materials to support student learning. ELLs have access to a wide variety of materials specifically designed for ELLs: Power Language, Getting ready for the NYSESLAT, Estrellita and Yasibi. All ELLs will have access to the Science content via the use of Full-Option Science System (FOSS) materials and resources. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not Applicable 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the start of the school year, parents of incoming students are invited to tour the school and meet the principal, assistant principals, parent coordinator and the staff. At this meeting, parents have the opportunity to learn and ask questions about the different programs in our school. There is a Special Events Committee, made up of teachers, parent coordinator and other school personnel, that organizes events throughout the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? NA 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is a key component for academic success. We at the Shakespeare School are committed to provide all teacher of ELLs, administrators, counselors and the school secretary with a comprehensive professional development program that will meet the individual needs of our staff . There are certain structures that our school follows in order to determine the professional development that our teachers need. We analyze our data from the ADVANCE system, informal and formal observation data, and student work. The instructional team which also includes the ENL teachers determine the needs of the staff. We are believers in individualized PD as well. In addition, all teachers are provided with a professional development survey at the beginning of the school year in order to provide them with the opportunity to select certain topics that teachers may feel they need further support on. Staff development takes place every Monday for 90 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  minutes and we also host a series of Lunch-N-Learn sessions with specific topics. The professional development plan is fully in place by the end of the school year and it is further revised in September, when the results of the survey for teachers selection of topics is available. Topics will include, but are not limited to the following: Who is an ELL? Analyzing NYSESLAT Data, implications for planning and instruction. Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs, Close Reading, Interactive Writing, Nuts and Bolts about NYSESLAT; Teaching Academic Vocabulary to ELLs, Using the Frayer Model. The ELL Institute offers monthly workshops on best teaching practices for ELLs. In addition to these workshops, teachers in the Bilingual/ENL program will meet every four weeks in order to discuss best practices around teaching ELA to ELLs based on their level of language proficiency. Our school will continue using the SIOP model for all students. Teachers have been trained in planning lesson using SIOP strategies. For the upcoming school year, a number of new teacher have joined our staff. These teachers will be provided professional development on best practices for English Language Learners (SIOP) by our ENL Coordinator and a Pearson Staff Developer. In addition, our school uses an open door policy for teacher to inter visit one another to observe best instructional practices. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school will continue to provide all teachers with intensive training on how to support ELLs in monolingual and bilingual settings using the researched based model: Sheltered Instructional Observational Protocol (SIOP ). In addition, our ENL teachers will provide professional development organized as a a cohort of series called "The ELL Institute". Our first session will focus on interpreting the NYSESLAT scores and the implications for planning and instruction. The sign-in sheets from all professional development sessions are filled and stored in a professional development binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers conduct individual meetings with parents during the 40-minute parent engagement block. During scheduled meeting with parents of ELLs, we provide them with academic progress reports and discuss how as parents they are able to support their children at home. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. Parental involvement is a key component to a child's success. Throughout the year, parents are given many opportunities in which they can play an active role in their children's education. The school shares information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; The school hosts literacy night, math game night and family night. We also host a new parent breakfast in September in which we inform parents about the school programs, expectations, support services and upcoming event. In this meeting, parents are also informed on how they can get involved in school events and be part of our parent volunteers. Because of its popularity among parents, we decided to continue offering ENL classes for parents.In addition, we will conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations. Literacy, How to access community and support services; technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home.. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. none 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Yasmin Quezada, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Shakespeare School School DBN: 09x199 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Yasmin Quezada Title Principal Marjorie Greene Assistant Principal Sandra Lopez Parent Coordinator Celeste Castillo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Cindy Cacpata Parent Magaly Fernandez Teacher/Subject Area Myrna Salguero Teacher/Subject Area Maria Abreu Samantha Ginsberg Coach Coach Ms. Raiza Santana School Counselor Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Jannet Franco Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Senior ELL Specialist Jane Pagan Other Related Services Maurice Lauriano Other Community Coordinator Joseph Allegretto Other ENL Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/26/18 0/00/00 0/00/00 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09x199 School Name: The Shakespeare School Superintendent: Leticia Rodrigu The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Celeste Joseph Castillo ENL Teacher Allegretto ENL Teacher Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess the language preferences of the parents for both written and oral communication, P.S, 199x uses various forms. The school determines the parent language of preference at registration when he or she completes the Home Language Survey, the student registration form, the student emergency card and the parent survey. All of these forms inform us the language in which the parent prefers to communicate with school staff. Then the information is entered into ATS, and it is used to ensure that parents' written translation and oral interpretation needs are met. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  The Home Language Identification Survey, which includes two questions regarding parents' language of preference, the emergency contact cards, registration forms, ethnic identification surveys as well as ATS reports such as RAPL and RCPL, are reviewed to identify the parents' language preference of communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish French Bengali Albanian Arabic Fulani Hatian Creole Soninke N/A N/A 385 303 5 2 1 1 1 1 1 N/A N/A 55% 43% 0.71% 0.28% 0.14% 0.14% 0.14% 0.14% 0.14% N/A N/A 381 305 6 1 1 1 1 1 1 N/A N/A 54% 43% 0.85% 0.28% 0.14% 0.14% 0.14% 0.14% 0.14% N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Registration and application documents August - June Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The school will use in-house school staff members as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Some of these documents have been 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  Letters from the Principal August- June Parent Teacher-Conference announcements September, November, March and May The monthly school calendar of events September-June The Parent Handbook September Principal's Newsletter September-June School Closures N/A Notices about New York City and State tests Two weeks prior to test already translated by the staff or the NYC Department of Education. The school will use in-house school staff members as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The school will use in-house school staff members as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The school will use in-house school staff members The school will use in-house school staff members as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit The school will use in-house school staff members The school will use in-house school staff members Some of these documents have been already translated by the staff or the NYC Department of Education. The school will use in-house school staff members Some of these documents have been already translated by school staff or by the New York State Department of Education. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night September Safety Town Hall Meeting September Dads Bring their Children to School September interpretation service(s)? The school will use in-house school staff members as well as the translation and Interpretation Unit. The school will use in-house staff members as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit. School staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  Monthly Parent Teacher Association Meetings September -June November Parent Teacher-Conferences March May Breakfast with the Principal Monthly ELA Reading Game Night March Math Game Night April ELL Parent Orientation Meetings As needed throughout the school year. IEP Meetings September-June Parent Volunteer Translation and Interpretation Unit The school will use in-house staff members as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Teachers can utilize the DOE Language Translation and Interpretation Services. The school will use in-house staff members as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit. If capacity is exceeded, we intend to contract services. The school will use in-house staff members as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit. If capacity is exceeded, we intend to contract services. The school will use in-house staff members as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit. If capacity is exceeded, we intend to contract services. The school will use in-house staff members as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit. School staff/ over- the- phone interpretation 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Members of our staff speak Spanish, French and Bengali which according to our data are the most widely preferred languages by parents. In case of an emergency, staff members can make phone calls and inform parents that they can call the school in their language. School staff is trained in the use of the 3-way call system to add Language Line to incoming calls. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are given copies of the Chancellor's regulation A-663 at faculty meetings. At this meeting, teachers are informed of the home language of their students. They are also informed that they can request translation services to communicate with parents. Brochures are given to teachers informing them of the availability of oral and written translation services provided by the NYC Department of Education. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As a school, we continuously strive to integrate our parents into our community. Therefore, the school administration and staff make every effort to provide parents with information in their native language. Parent letters and notices are translated into Spanish and French. We also provide translated documents in low incidence languages such as Bengali and Arabic. Translation and interpretation posters are displayed in the main lobby of the school, the PTA room and the main office. Parents are informed of all available translation services via our monthly newsletter that is published in English, in Spanish and French. Parents who are hearing impaired can use the Relay Call System to communicate with school staff. When in-house staff members cannot provide the specific services, the NYC Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit is used. Parents also have access to the Parents' Guide Access Card and the Parents' Bill of Rights . Parents are provided with a copy of the Parents' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. To ensure that parents can communicate in the language of their preference, the school will use funding for translation and interpretation to provide translation of non-covered languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will be given a survey to evaluate the quality of the translation and interpretation services provided throughout the year. The results of the survey will be used to improve the quality and availability of these services. Also after interpretation services, parents will be asked about their satisfaction with the services. Based on the feedback from parents, our school is now translating more documents into low incidence languages. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87  2018-19 SCEP-FL 88 
