2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 10X207 P.S. 207 Principal: TARA OBRIEN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 10x207 Public School 207 321000010207 Pre-K - 2 3030 Godwin Terrace Bronx, NY 10463 718-796-9645 Phone Number: 718-796-4537 Fax: Ms. Betancourt Lbetancourt2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Tara O'Brien Mr. Luis Pereira RosalySantana Ms. Tara O'brien Norma Estrada KingsbridgeCommunity Heights Center CBO Representative: Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information MaribelHulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10458 MHulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY10458 NSaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-741-5835 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tara OBrien Luis Pereira RosalySantana Norma Estrada KingsbridgeCommunity Heights Center Ileana McGeever Elizabeth Bartosh *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) RosalinaMartinez Norma Estrada ElidiaFlores Nancy Sosa Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school vision of “Growing Leaders of Today and Tomorrow”, is supported by our mission to provide a safe, nurturing, and developmentally appropriate school experience which develops the whole child. Together as a team, our staff, families and community, are committed to fully supporting both the academic and social emotional needs of our students. Each day, we guide our students through rich experiences as they grow, learn and discover the leadership skills necessary to make significant impact on their school, home, and global community. Our vision is supported by our mission to provide a developmentally appropriate, engaging, safe and supportive learning environment. Each day, our students engage in interdisciplinary tasks designed to foster critical thinking skills 2018-19 CEP 9  alongside activities focused on their physical and emotional well being. We believe that both academic and social-emotional learning are fundamental to our students’ success in growing into leaders of today and tomorrow. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 207 is an elementary school located in the ethnically diverse community in the Kingsbridge section of the Bronx. Our school vision of “Growing Leaders of Today and Tomorrow”, is supported by our mission to provide a safe, nurturing, and developmentally appropriate school experience which develops the whole child. Together as a team, our staff, families and community, are committed to fully supporting both the academic and social emotional needs of our students. Each day, we guide our students through rich experiences as they grow, learn and discover the leadership skills necessary to make significant impact on their school, home, and global community. Each day, we strive to ensure that learning is a stimulating, invigorating, and engaging experience designed to meet the needs of our diverse student population. This effort begins with the creation of a community designed to develop a love, desire and excitement for learning. This aesthetic blueprint begins at our main entrance, inviting our students and visitors into a building filled with a rich visual experiences throughout. Evergreens frame the entrance steps which lead to double doors boasting our new orange and gray school colors along with our newly designed school logo; two abstract figures which form a tree trunk and its branches with small hand prints serving as the leaves. Lively colors continue into our front vestibule which we have coined as Welcome Way. This area of our community includes our Give One, Take One Board emphasizing the importance of kindness while building social emotional and leadership values, our Welcome to P.S. 207 Board for parents and families, our School Leadership Team Board which includes our school goals and a Bravo Board, exhibiting our honors and recognitions received over the years. Immediately past Welcome Way, our students and visitors are greeted by our cafe-theater doors decorated with life-size R.O.C.K.S. guitars etched with two life size guitars reflecting our school leadership values including respect, organization, cooperation, kindness, and safety, serving as a reminder to all who enter this community to uphold the leadership values we hold true. These doors lead into our Seasons Cafe, decorated in playful, lively murals reflecting and celebrating the cycles of the four seasons which vary significantly and prompt renewed change and growth. Each of our graduates leave a hand print on the massive tree mural, which celebrates their growth during their time with us. Like the changing seasons, the passing of each year allows us to delight in the learning and discovery that our students engage in as they grow into young leaders of today and tomorrow. Our community design continues throughout the hall and stairwells of our building. The walls and bulletin boards of our main floor serve as a reminder to all who enter that 207 R.O.C.K.S. leadership values, academics, social emotional learning and teamwork are priorities at P.S. 207. The halls of our first floor have been transformed into neighborhoods including Leadership Lane celebrating our young leaders, Healthy Highway, depicting our dedication to healthy living, Academics Avenue and R.O.C.K.S.Road which celebrate the wonderful teaching and learning that takes place each day, and Writers Walkway, accentuating and illustrating the Instructional Focus at P.S. 207. In keeping with our community theme, our stairwells are referred to as Experiences Expressway, dedicated to showcasing our students’ participation in learning expeditions throughout the year and Celebrations Circle, showcasing our monthly festivities. Our upper floors have been divided into “neighborhoods” for each grade level placing emphasis on literacy with book and author themes throughout, with our Pre-K “neighborhood” transformed into Bill Martin, our Kindergarten into Eric Carle Court, First Grade into Mo Williams Expressway, and our second grade into Arnold LobelCorner, Patricia Polaccco Place. In addition to providing a visually stimulating experience for all of our students, families, and visitors, our surroundings serve as a support for our special populations, including our English-Language Learners and Students with Disabilities, who greatly benefit from a setting which taps into varied learning styles. Alongside our specifically designed environment, we offer an academic program which includes bilingual, ESL and ICT, programs and our curriculum and student supports are tailored to meet the needs of all of our students. Our students and staff begin the day with a quick morning meeting which includes announcements and a Headspace activity which helps to mentally prepare our students for a rigorous day of learning. First period each day is dedicated to building the social emotional learning skills of our students. Our morning routine, includes a Morning Meeting each day, weekly 2018-19 CEP 10  nutrition classes, Move-to-Improve physical movement classes, and weekly Growing Leaders lessons. The focus on the emotional and social well-being of our students prepares them to fully engage in academic learning each day. Our content based literacy and exploratory mathematics with embedded project based assessments in addition to our specials include STEAM (Science, Engineering, Art, Mathematics), Music and Visual arts courses promote student language development, student understanding and embed authentic opportunities for our students to engage with the world around them. Our carefully planned campus, exciting learning opportunities, strategically chosen partnerships and initiatives are intended to build a feeling of joy of coming to school and to align with our mission of providing an environment that fosters leadership values through growth, learning and discovery. At P.S. 207 we hold true to our values, to ensure that each child feels safe and nurtured in a developmentally appropriate environment where we build the leadership skills of our early childhood students which provide a foundation which will allow them to compete in our ever-changing global community. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our diverse population is made up of 58% male students and 42% female students. Ethnic backgrounds include 80% Hispanic, 4% Asian, 1% Native American, 8% African American and 7% white students. Special populations include 39% ENL students , 21% SWD students, and 73% of our students are economically disadvantaged. We tailor our models and supports to fit the needs of our students. Our school offers ESL for all grade levels, Kindergarten and First grade Dual Language classes, and a TBE class for our second and third graders, and self-contained, ICT, and related services for our students with disabilities. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Key Areas of Progress This past year we have focused on communicating high expectations to staff, families’ and students by collaboratively identifying and promoting college and career readiness strategies, exemplified in the school-wide implementation of fostering rigorous habits for organization and planning that students, parents, and teachers have internalized. Moreover, we have promoted the culture of mutual accountability in strengthening instruction, professional learning and collaborations as evident in the indicators of success for Supportive Environment. We have also continued to focus on our Learning Environment, and have been recognized for maintaining a culture that radiates trust and positivity generated by everyone understanding the expectations across the grades. Our staff members take accountability for all students and are knowledgeable about students’ successes and challenges. This environment of inclusiveness promotes students’ growth personally and academically. Students of varying abilities are supported by teachers through the use of routines that contribute to effective classroom management such as our checklist of criteria for success. Throughout the school we have highlighted social and academic behaviors as they relate to the instructional vision and objectives of our school. In building a supportive environment, we have established venues through which high expectations for learning are communicated to all community stakeholders which include newsletters to families, parent workshops on a range of topics to meet the needs of our learning community, electronic communication with the staff, observation cycles, and professional development. We will continue to provide more means of communication through which parents may access administrators, secretaries and the parent coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 11  Key Areas of Focus Priority 1: Utilizing the Coherence Framework Provide a safe, nurturing, and developmentally appropriate school experience which develops the whole child in a supportive and inclusive learning environment. Priority 2: Social Emotional Learning Support both academic and social-emotional learning of our students as they grow into leaders of today and tomorrow. Priority 3: Advanced Literacy Focus Students engage in authentic tasks based in rich discussion and writing activities designed to foster critical thinking skills and support the academic and emotional well being of our students. Our key area Our area of focus is to continue to strategically enhance teacher pedagogy so that instructional strategies such as higher order questioning, accountable talk, and student choice are consistently seen across all classrooms. We have been successful in building teacher practices to include our the common beliefs about how students learn best by being engaged in discussions and having a checklist of criteria for success (learning outcomes). Our goal is to continue to build teacher capacity with opportunities for students to respond to higher order thinking questions, visibly demonstrate their thinking and develop open-ended questions that promote higher order thinking through rigorous tasks with a focus on building student vocabulary and broaden the use of multiple entry points to meet the diverse needs of students as evidenced by improvement and volume of quality student writing products. In keeping with the Framework for Great Schools for collaborative teachers, the administrative and instructional teams have structured systems to ensure that teachers meet in teams on a weekly basis. Teams including teachers of students with disabilities (SWDs) and English language learners (ELLs) meet weekly to refine and modify curriculum and analyze student work using a tuning protocol, focusing on looking for patterns and trends in student work, challenges and strengths and how teachers can modify and adjust their teaching practices. As a result of the analysis of student work, teachers typically change their types of questions, small group instruction in guided reading. In addition to teacher-made assessments and tasks from the City’s CC library, benchmark assessments from Developmental Reading Assessment 2 (DRA2) and end-of-unit tests from Go Math are uniformly used, summarized by class and grade, thus providing a clear picture of student progress toward classroom and grade-level goals. Teachers regularly engage in team based inquiry-oriented professional collaborations resulting in shared leadership, mutual accountability for improved practice, impacting student learning. (4.2) Effective School Leadership is demonstrated through the administrative team's implementation of a system for classroom observation and feedback aligned with the Danielson teaching framework that has created a school-wide instructional focus resulting in professional growth. (4.1) Early in the year, teachers identify professional growth goals aligned to this framework that are documented and tracked to note progress in target growth areas. In support of the development of new and veteran teachers, the principal and AP conduct short, frequent 2018-19 CEP 12  classroom visits to observe teaching, examine room environment, and to look at student work. They then craft feedback and next steps based on the Danielson teaching framework, and provide levels of performance and actionable comments for improving teaching. Administrators record this information and summarize trends to assess progress towards the school’s instructional focus on coherent planning and strategies like questioning and student self-assessment techniques. School leaders and instructional coaches work effectively to incorporate trends from teacher observations and student data into the design of professional development. Support for teachers is then customized into cycles of in-class coaching support and/or lab site experiences where teachers observe the coach or their peers using a targeted strategy, and as they try the strategy themselves, receive input on how to refine the practice. Teachers also attend workshops outside of school to deepen their knowledge and skill in goal areas and then present to their colleagues. This work has furthered the school’s commitment to continuous improvement as evidenced by faculty buy-in to the process, teacher reflections, and observed professional growth in use of certain targeted strategies. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X207 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 308 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 11 33 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 21 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 83.8% % Reduced Lunch 34.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 79.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.07 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 2 2 89.4% 1.0% 16.9% 7.5% 5.2% 0.3% 2 4% 9.2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Approaching instruction with clear instructional goals, beginning with the end in mind, not only makes intuitive sense but is well supported by research. In order to develop a proven track record of increasing student achievement we determined that there is a need for teachers to improve tracking systems for monitoring students progress using a variety of assessments. Developing authentic assessment tools and administering them and examining students performance will support a practice that will address our overarching goal to increase student progress.  We will determine strengths and next steps at each level and evaluate during four points in the school year. Strengths and next steps support planning and instruction.  Baseline, Mid-line, End-line: Assessments created and adapted in all content areas, analyzed, and adjustments made to units of study, individual student goals created, grade-level, and school-wide goals.  Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessments - Running records: Ongoing assessment and tracking of students’ independent reading levels.  Project based assessments  Go Math Unit Assessments 2018-19 CEP 15   Pre and post assessments in integrated content area units (social studies/science/art)  Daily assessment / checking for understanding  NYSESLAT assists in creating targets and long term goals for ELL students.  Teacher / Student / class goals - Student work process / products (student notebooks, folders) - Checklists, criteria, rubrics Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all Grade 1 and 2 students will demonstrate an increase in reading performance as evidenced by an increase of 30% of Level 1 and Level 2 students meeting grade level benchmarks and one year reading growth for all students as measured by growth from the Fall 2018 F& P assessment performance to the Spring 2019 performance data. By June 2019, students will demonstrate an increase in math performance as evidenced by an increase of 15% of Level 1 and Level 2 students mastering grade level math standards as measured by the growth on the Fall 2018 Math Performance Task to the Spring 2019 Math Performance Task. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  PD Data analysis/protocols Whole school Tuesdays Admin, Coaches, teachers 6 week cycles Sept.-Jun. Admin, Coaches, teachers  Update database tool and train 2-3 weeks teachers on use  PL related to data analysis  Student Work Inquiry Admin, coaches, grade leaders Teachers Admin, Coaches, teachers Ongoing through common planning Coaches, Teachers Teachers Weekly Teachers 2018-19 CEP 17   Mid Unit On Demand Tasks  Beg, Mid, End Performance Tasks  Administration and teachers will provide small group targeted reading instruction to students below grade level 4-5x a week. Teachers & students Sept.-Jun. Teachers & students Sept.,Jan. , May Coaches, Teachers Teachers & students Daily 20 mins. Admin, Coaches, teachers Students Sept., Jan., Jun. Staff, Coaches, Teachers Coaches, Teachers Coaches, teachers FSC  Provide Tier 3 RTI intervention in the form of Reading rescue and Lexia Programs driven by diagnostic assessments. Sept.- Jun.  Grade level team planning (project based curriculum) Teachers & students Teachers & students Sept.- Jun.  TC based Interdisciplinary Literacy curriculum  ELL Training Teachers & students Once a month and biweekly on Thurs. ongoing Sept. -Jun. New teachers ongoing FSC 2018-19 CEP 18  Balanced Literacy Training Nov.-May Students Teachers  Level 1 & 2 students will participate in an afterschool program designed using assessment data that will target 5 pillars of reading skills and math fluency. n/a n/a n/a n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops are provided by our ULit Coach, Math & ELA Coach, and Specials Teachers. Parents will engage in activities that show them how our curriculum engages children in learning in math and reading. Parents will be given packets of material that provide activities and strategies in math and reading that they can use to support their children at home. Parents will also be given manipulatives, reading books, and literacy games that can be utilized at home. Workshops will begin in September and occur every 3-4 weeks on Tuesdays. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for data analysis for after school meeting Per session for after school and per diem for PD coverage Scheduled time during the school day for common planning Scheduled time during the school day for teacher teams to master and apply the student protocol meetings for new teachers Consultants to support instructional practices in the classrooms Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 19  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will engage in targeted collaborative professional learning using authentic student work and assessments to refine a unit of study that implements rigorous instruction. By February 2019, K-2 interim F & P progress monitoring assessment will be administered and analyzed to measure an increase of reading performance of at least 15% and increase in math performance by 7%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) School-based K-2 ELA performance task assessments and Math Performance Task Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Due to our school being placed on the persistently dangerous school list for the 2016-2017 school year. our priority need is to ensure a focus on a SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT that will facilitate full engagement within our school community. Our staff was committed to ensuring academic and social emotional excellence in a supportive environment for all students. In an effort to meet the needs of the whole child we will continue to build our capacity to look at and respond to student behavior in a functional way and use research based tools to assist struggling students. We will continue our PBIS R.O.C.K.S (Respect, Organization, Cooperation, Kindness, Safety) system and partner it with Second Step Program for social emotional learning. By implementing a variety of to provide an inclusive and enriching experience, and have a positive learning environment across all contexts of the school. Through our collective efforts we have made significant strides which have resulted in a 74% decrease in number of incidences reported on OORS. As a result of these efforts the state has recommended that our school be taken off the persistently dangerous status. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100 % of students will engage in Second Step Program allowing them to develop students as independent learners and develop social emotional habits in both their learning, attending to tasks, and attending school regularly resulting in improvement of a 5% overall attendance increase to students moving towards proficiency in targeted academic tasks. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Second Step Training Teachers October 2018-May 2019 Administration, coaches Sept.2018-Jun. 2019 All Teachers  Morning Meeting (move to improve) Students  90% teachers TCI trained Students Oct.2018-Nov. 2019 FSC  PBIS R.O.C.K.S. Rubric & Guitar  Class Dojo  Student Council Sep. 2018-June 2019 Teachers Sep. 2018-June 2019 Sep. 2018-June 2019 Coach Students Sep. 2018-June 2019 Coach, teachers Students & parents Sep. 2018-June 2019 Sep. 2018-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 22   Kindness Keepers  Lunch Bunch  Ready Kid  Monthly ROCKS book of the month  Monthly Assembly  Afterschool programs  Reading Writing Respect Resolution  Masterful Parenting Class  Parent engagement Tuesdays  Progress Reports N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students Teacher Sep. 2018-June 2019 Students Social Worker Sep. 2018-June 2019 Students Nov-May School Aides Students Students Sep. 2018-June 2019 Sep. 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers Coach Sep. 2018-June 2019 Students Students Student Parents Parents N/A Oct, Jan, May-2018-2019 Coach Coach Parent Coordinator, Social Worker Classroom Teachers Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 23  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Once a month on Tuesday afternoons, parents will participate in activities around Social Emotional Learning that mirrors what students are learning in school. The school social worker is also providing Masterful Parenting classes to provide parents with skills around topics that include: ways to speak to children about difficult topics, how to help them make tough decisions, and teaching them healthy ways about expressing their feelings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for data analysis for after school meeting Scheduled time during the school day for common planning Scheduled time during the school day for teacher teams to master and apply the student protocol meetings for new teachers Budget for consultants and training Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2018, all students including ELL's and SWD's, will demonstrate progress of at least 2% increase in positive behavior as measured by OORS from EOY 2016- MOY 2017. By February 2018, teacher teams will meet to analyze progress of mid benchmark positive behavior results data to plan next steps and adjust action plans for students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS and school based assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. High-quality collaboration benefits teachers and students;when teachers engage in high quality collaboration that they perceive as extensive and helpful, there is both an individual and collective benefit. Therefore our priority need is to ensure teacher teams meet bi-weekly to plan rigorous instructional plans and strategies that will include tiered task for all students based on assessed learning needs. High-quality collaboration in general and about assessment in particular among teachers is associated with increases in their students’ achievement, their performance, and their peers’ students’ achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By 2018, 100% of teacher teams will engage in the Collaborative Inquiry approach to promote ongoing revision of the instructional core (specifically, Writing) which will lead to an increase of higher order curriculum as measured by an overall 10% increase of student work samples and evidenced by results on our project based assessments, Fountas & Pinnell benchmarks, Teachers College writing benchmarks, and teacher team agendas and progress notes. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Actions from Goal 1  An Opening Structure providing rationale for the lesson: Why are we learning this? Sept.2018- Jun.2019  A Teaching Point and language objective  Criteria for Success including VOCAB for students to use  A RICH task or activity  Opportunities for students to DISCUSS using Kagan Cooperative Learning Structures  Quality Questions presented within a Kagan cooperative learning structure) that you pose related to their work and throughout your lesson Strategic Grouping   Resources and Materials are available and are used as Lesson enhancers  Opportunities for students to self-assess/peer assess/reflect  ROCKS behavior acknowledgement and reference/highlights  Checks for understanding THROUGHOUT the lesson  Parent and Student involvement in decisions  Weekly grade level team meetings/use of LASW protocols  PLC Mondays  Unpacking days  Data Analysis   Cognitive Rigor Matrix Standards Alignment N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers Teachers Students & Staff Teachers & Students Classroom teachers Admin, coaches, teachers Admin, coaches, teachers Coaches and teachers N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 26  Families will be invited in monthly for workshops designed to support parents understanding of rigorous instruction and the common core. Workshops are provided by our ULIT Coach, Math & ELA Coach, and Specials Teachers. Parents will engage in activities that show them how our curriculum engages children in learning in math and reading. Parents will be given packets of material that provide activities and strategies in math and reading that they can use to support their children at home. Parents will also be given manipulatives, reading books, and literacy games that can be utilized at home. Workshops will begin in September and occur every 3-4 weeks on Tuesdays. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Saturday Academy for grade 3 students with instructional focus on strengthening ELA and Math Skills ending in April 2019. In addition, we will be inviting students in grades 1 and 2 who are reading below grade level standards to our after school program on Wednesdays and Thursdays ending in May 2019. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January-February 2019, MOY assessments administered ( i.e. F&Ps, ECLAS 2, Math, Theme, Writing Tasks) will be reviewed and the data results will be used to refine curriculum, instructional practice and assessments. The collaboration between teacher teams helps articulate on the grade and across the grades gaps and strengths. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. F& P will be administered and results analyzed Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Educators seek a framework for instructional leadership that will produce sustainable school improvement.Through collaboration, collegiality, community, cooperation, and communication, interdependence emerges and is nourished. Therefore our priority need is to continue to build teacher capacity through professional development that will improve teacher practice which leads to increased overall student achievement. We will continue to build leadership by organizing staff into groups of teachers organized into teams—grade-level groups, departments, and small professional collaborative work groups that will rotate in six week cycles, each headed by a leader who facilitates the group's work and guides it toward a common end. Teachers on each grade level are provided with time to unpack units of study. There will also be half day unpacking sessions for teachers of students with disabilities and teachers of English Language Learners, to allow time to make modifications to the current curriculum that will meet the needs of these subgroups. The needs assessment was a result of data collected at the beginning of the school year via survey, as well as data collected during Initial Planning Conferences. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will engage in and implement a minimum of 20 in-house professional learning sessions focused on Responsive Classroom supports and techniques resulting in an increase of 5% positive responses on NYC Learning Environment Survey that measures Supportive Environment. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). N/a  Actions from goal 1(data)  An Opening Structure providing rationale for the lesson: Why are we learning this?  A Teaching Point and language objective  Criteria for Success including VOCAB for students to use  A RICH task or activity  Opportunities for students to DISCUSS using Kagan Cooperative Learning Structures  Quality Questions presented within a Kagan cooperative learning structure) that you pose related to their work and throughout your lesson Strategic Grouping   Resources and Materials are available and are used as Lesson enhancers  Opportunities for students to self-assess/peer assess/reflect  ROCKS behavior acknowledgement and reference/highlights  Checks for understanding THROUGHOUT the lesson  Parent and Student involvement in decisions  Weekly grade level team meetings/use of LASW protocols  PLC Mondays  Unpacking days N/a Students Sept.2018 Jun. 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Admin, Coaches  Admin  Admin, Coaches  SLT team members  Admin, Coaches 2018-19 CEP 29  Standards Alignment  Data Analysis   Cognitive Rigor Matrix  Individual professional learning plan tailored to the needs of teachers based on observation data  Teacher surveys of needs and professional growth goals  Grade leaders: Lead teachers assume a wide range of roles to support school and student success. These roles, assigned formally or informally, they build the entire school's capacity to improve. Lead teachers support their colleagues by sharing instructional resources for all students, including English as new language learners, students with disabilities and high performing students. These might include Web sites, instructional materials, readings, or other resources to use with students. They also share professional resources as articles, books, lesson or unit plans, and assessment tools. Lead teachers work inside classrooms to help teachers implement new ideas, often by demonstrating a lesson, coteaching, or observing and giving feedback on how to best support students.  SLT  Coaching Support Cycles: Instructional coaching cycles will focus on increasing the achievement and engagement of every student by bringing out the best performance of every teacher. Coaches will use both student-centered and teacher-centered method to allow teachers to improve decisions about instruction. Coaches will engage teachers in a goal oriented cycles  Admin, coaches  Admin  Admin, Coaches, Teachers  Admin, Coaches, Teachers  Admin, Coaches, Teachers Teachers Students Parents, Staff, Students, Admin 2018-19 CEP 30  which will focus on goals related to the teacher practice and achievement of all students, including English language learners, students with disabilities and high performing students. Teacher /student  School leader support cycles  Classroom labsites for classroom teachers  Monday PD cycles that include Responsive Classroom videos and reflection: Mondays professional learning series will deliver continued teacher development. These data derived series will allow teachers to maintain and enhance the knowledge and skills needed to support student learning at all levels. Through ongoing, engaging and teacher led learning series, teachers will be kept up to date on new research on best teaching practices to support English language learners, students with disabilities and high performing students as well as strategies to support lesson planning and tools to support these practices.  Teacher Team and Team Meetings: Grade level teams improve student achievement. Teachers engage in inquiry lead discussions and using a "Looking at student work" protocol they discuss and research best strategies, best practices for all students, including English Language Learners and students with 2018-19 CEP 31 disabilities, analyze data, and create action plans for individual students.  Responsive Classroom Professional Development for the school community: Teachers received responsive classroom training, an evidence-based approach to teaching that focuses on engaging academics, positive community, effective management, and developmental awareness. As a result teachers will be able to create differentiated learning task suitable for English language learners, students with disabilities and high performing student that are active, interactive, appropriately challenging, culturally relevant and purposeful. Teachers will use the knowledge of child development, along with data collected daily, to create a developmentally appropriate learning environment. n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018- June 2019, we will engage parents by inviting them to participate in multiple school wide events throughout the year. We encourage families to visit during our Parent Engagement time held Tuesday afternoons. We communicate with parents via class DOJO, Parent News & Notes, School Messenger, Monthly Parent Association and School Leadership Team meetings. In addition to offering a variety of parent workshops every month. The implementation of events mentioned above are as a result of our LES. Staff members who facilitate these events can be our Parent Coordinator, Members of our Coach/ Admin Team, as well as members of our teaching staff. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time for professional development, per session and per diem Scheduled time during the school day for individual conferences with each teacher and an administrator Scheduled time during the school day teacher observation and pre and post-conferences Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January we will do the MOY Advance data analysis using the dashboard to see progress in domain 3. Data will be used to plan next steps for individual teachers as well as on grade or school-wide patterns/trends. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance web application dashboard. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parent, family and community involvement in education correlates with higher academic performance and school improvement. This year our goal was to develop strong ties with families to ensure their active participation in decision making throughout the school in order to enhance school improvement and effectiveness. Although improvements have been made in communicating with parents as a school community, our priority need is to continue to collaborate and find new ways to encourage increased participation in meetings, special events, and workshops. This focus will improve family and community outreach. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, there will be an overall increase by 10% of parent/ guardian/ family members’ engagement in specific of school designed activities to support them as partners in their child’s education as evidenced by attendance sheets, and parents completing the Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Parent workshops - nutrition - reading - parenting class - ESL Parents  Progress Reports  Class Dojo Messenger  Parent News & Notes for communication Parents & Students Parents Sept.2017-Jun.2018 Bi-Monthly Parent Coordinator, Parents Association, Social Worker Oct, Jan. May Parents & Students Sept.2017-Jun.2018 Sept.2017-Jun.2018 Teachers Teachers Admin, Parent Coordinator Sept.2017-Jun.2018  School Website with Parent Information Page Parents Sept.2017-Jun.2018 Admin, Coaches, teachers, Parents 2018-19 CEP 35   Parent engagement Tuesdays  Cultural Family luncheons  Graduation Committee Parents, Students, Staff Students Students & Community  Senior center Students May  Field day  Family movie night  Holiday family celebrations Students & Families 3x/Year Students & Families 4x/Year Students Students May Parents & students November,2017 June 2018 Admin, Teachers,Staff Sept-Jun All Staff and Parents Admin, Teachers, Parents, Staff Admin, Participating Teacher Admin, Teachers, Staff, students, parents Parent Association, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 36  Career day Sept-Jun  Trips to cultural institutions Admin, Teachers, Staff, Parents Admin, Teachers Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. During the previous school year we have developed many partnerships to help support our families in becoming part of our school community. Our partnerships include the Hispanic Federation, Office of Adult Education, Circle of Security, MyLibraryNYC, Office of Mental Health THRIVE division, and Cornell University Healthy Eating Program. These programs are overseen by our Parent Coordinator and Assistant Principal to ensure that they are meeting the needs of our families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common planning time for Principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, selected teachers Staff attendance at Parent Orientation/Family Night/Open House for Parents Parent coordinator’s planning and hosting of parent workshops Staff attendance at Student recognition events Family Engagement Tuesdays Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 37  By January 2018, we will analyze parent participation rate from September to December 2017 as compared to FY 2015-16 to note an increase of at least 5% participation in activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sign in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) MOSL –F & P, NYC Performance Task, Mathematics Science Social Studies NYC Performance Task, Unit Tests and School based Assessments School based Assessments School based Assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Behavior Skills Survey, Teacher Observations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, 1-to-1 During the day, after school Small group, 1-to-1, During the day, after school Small group During the day Small group During the day Small group, 1-to-1 During the day CKLA Unit Test, Direct Instruction and/or Guided Reading, , Project Read Small group instruction and projects GO Math Small group instruction and projects Small group instruction and project-based Small group instruction and project-based Counseling, play therapy, conflict resolution, Socialization , Coping skills, character development 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 91 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our Social Worker will provide referral to Parent Outreach and Social Services as well as any relevant and applicable literature available, is given. Monies set aside for any special circumstances which may arise with these students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 40  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 41  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. For recruiting purposes we use the DOE Teacher Finder, Teaching Fellows, Teach for America, Open Market, College Student Teachers Placements, DHR and Central borough wide hiring Job Fairs. Based on the candidates strengths we interview and match candidates with our school community. Our school’s has a low turn-over rate of teachers and we maintain this status by affording on-going professional development opportunities, teacher teams collaborations, intra as well as inter-visitations, peer to peer collaboration, coaches as well as administrative support in embracing and extending our instructional initiatives and expectations, and establishing common preparation & lunch periods for networking. New teaching staff is matched up with a mentor for additional support. Our coaches and consultants work with teachers in cycles throughout the year focused on the needs as well as initiatives for the year. Teachers also use the services of the DOE professional development, network- based opportunities, UFT teacher center established at the school as well as any coursework which they may need. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Promote and facilitate CCLS aligned student work that reflects the implementation of current system-wide reform initiatives. Integrate professional development for monolingual and bilingual/ESL staff into the ongoing instructional activities of the school, for example, through multidisciplinary planning, common preparation periods, and locally designed professional support. Involve parents in their children's education through greater collaboration with teachers and other school staff, and increased engagement in the school's education program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 42  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We have on-going communication with the Preschools in the neighborhoods. Staff members visit and provide presentations about our school life and expectations. Every June incoming pre-kindergarten students are invited with their teachers to visit our school and we provide a tour to the Kindergarten classrooms. Parents as well are invited to an Orientation meeting where they receive an orientation, tour the classrooms and meet the Kindergarten teachers and key personnel in the school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers on the MOSL team have worked collaboratively to determine the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures, as well as professional development has been provided to the entire staff. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 CEP 43 Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for  school allocation amounts) Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 296,163.00 233,832.00 18,894.00 0 2,231,030.00 x x x x x Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E Section 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E Section 5A,5B,5C,5E NA Section 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 CEP 44   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 207 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 207 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 47  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act ; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Public School 207, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 48  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 49  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 207 is a Pre-K- 2 school located in the Kingsbridge neighborhood of the Bronx where we believe that literacy is fundamental to our students' success in learning today in order to become leaders of tomorrow. Our literacy-centered, developmentally appropriate, safe, and supportive learning environment is strategically designed to support our students both academically and socially. Our literacy curriculum further supports our vision by being rooted in Content Literacy instruction which provides students with advanced literacy instruction, which is tightly connected to content areas including social studies, science, mathematics, and literature. Of the total school population (319 students), 33% are English Language Learners (104 ELLs, including 2 years eligible-commanding ELLs ). At P.S. 207 we treasure the diversity of our school population and are committed to providing every ELL student with the opportunity to excel academically, socially, and to become bi-literate in English and in Spanish. Currently P.S 207 has a Push In/Pull Out English as a New Language Program, a Kindergarten and First Grade Dual Language Program, and a Transitional Bilingual Education Program on second and third grade. As the community ethnicity break-down shows, the Home Language Survey also indicates that the most common home language of the majority of our English Language Learners is Spanish. The Fall 2017 NYSITELL and the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT scores indicated that in regards to language proficiency, our students need improvement in writing and reading. In order to meet the needs of our students in the area of reading, we have partnered with Lexia Learning to provide a computer based program, Lexia Core 5, that will address the development of oral language, reading, spelling, and writing skills for English Language Learners. The Lexia Core 5 program has an explicit and systematic structure that provides differentiation for students on multiple levels. It also has a feature that allows for students to receive support of questions and directions in their native language. Students will be able to use this program at home, which will also help to build family literacy skills because parents will be able to work along side their students with native language assistance from the program. English Language Learners in all monolingual and bilingual classes will utilize this program daily. Program material will be purchased using Title III Immigrant Funds in conjunction with other funding sources. In addition to daily in class supports, students will take part in our ELL After-school Program. The ultimate goal for the program is not only to strengthen their literacy skills, but to make content and language comprehensible. The smaller class size in our After-school program will allow for more extensive work on targeted direct instruction with students. The teachers will utilize data available to form flexible groups based on language proficiency and literacy abilities. Program 1- P.S. 207's ELL After-school Program will consist of 40 First, Second, and Third Grade ELL students at various levels (EN-TR). This program will focus on strengthening the academic content knowledge and literacy skills tested on the NYSESLAT. The main objective of the program will be to equip these students with the reading and writing skills needed to move them to the next level of language proficiency on the Spring 2019 NYSESLAT. Emphasis will also be placed on developing the vocabulary and literacy sophistication skills necessary to be successful on non-fiction sections of the NYSESLAT. This objective will be accomplished through students use of Lexia for a prescribed amount of time a week as deemed by Lexia 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information placement assessment. Students will then be engaged in small group targeted reading and writing lessons delivered by an instructor. The language of instruction in this program will be English. Materials to be used include: Lexia Core 5 Online program and literacy games and Empire NYESELAT Prep material. This program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays for an hour and a half from 2:30-4:00 pm and will run from November 7, 2018 through June 13, 2019. Instruction will be provided by our fully certified TESOL teacher and Reading specialist. Program 2- P.S. 207's ELL After-school Program will consist of 40 Second and Third Grade ELL students at the Expanding level. This program will focus on strengthening the academic content knowledge and literacy skills tested on the NYSESLAT. The main objective of the program will be to build their skills so that they can place Commanding on the NYSESLAT. Emphasis will also be placed on developing the vocabulary and literacy sophistication skills necessary to be successful on non-fiction sessions of the NYSESLAT. This objective will be accomplished by engaging students in activities and tasks that explore in depth the academic content knowledge and non-fiction literacy skills until mastering them. Students will use the Lexia program for a prescribed amount of time each week as recommended by the Lexia Placement Level. Students will then be engaged in small group targeted reading lessons delivered by an instructor and guided writing exercises. The language of instruction in this program will be English. Materials to be used include: Empire NYSESLAT prep material and the Lexia Core 5 program. This program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays for an hour and half from 2:30-4:00pm and will run from November 7, 2018 through June 13, 2019. Instruction will be provided by a fully certified TESOL teacher and Reading Specialist. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The focus of our Professional Development will be to provide high quality training to the teachers of ELLs on effective, Common Core-aligned instructional practices that address the academic and linguistic needs of ELLs. Currently, the ENL Coordinator conducts professional developments during Common Planning time for teachers and paraprofessionals to train them on developing lessons and applying best practice strategies to serve English Language Learners enrolled in our ELL Program. When teachers meet weekly for Professional Learning Sessions, based on findings, (CCLS) units of study are created and modified, lesson plans are differentiated and instruction is targeted to specific modalities. They work in collaborative groups looking at student work, creating task to promote coherent learning, designing action plans and academic intervention groupings that are geared to differentiated instruction for ELL's. In these sessions teachers are given support and a variety of strategies and themes that support and enhance all modalities; listening, speaking, reading and writing. In addition, the school schedule has a built-in time for ELL personnel to meet every other week for 50 minutes to receive professional development from the ENL Coordinator and any District ELL Specialist. DELLS also provides training off-site throughout the year that teachers are registered to attend. In addition, our ELL Coordinator and selected school ENL teachers, Bilingual Teachers, School Pupil Secretary and Paraprofessionals are also registered to receive 2018-19 CEP 54  Part C: Professional Development professional developments sponsored by the Office of English Language Learners at Central and the Borough Field Support Center. Some of the topics our school targets for professional development are: State/City ELL mandates, Identification and Placement Process, Instructional Strategies and Interventions for Classroom Implementation, Formative Assessments, and Co-Teaching Practices. Any of the components above and our scheduled PD sessions below will come at no cost to Title III. The overall schedule below was strategically designed to provide training for all teachers who work with ELLs and will last 1 hour in duration. September 2018 Topic: Creating Goals for Students Provider: Tara O'Brien, Principal October 2018 Topic: Using data tools to plan for ELLs Topic: Using the 3L's in planning Provider: LaSheanma Santiago, ENL Coordinator November 2018 Topic: Unpacking the NYSESLAT-Speaking and Listening Provider: LaSheanma Santiago, ENL Coordinator December 2018 Topic: Unpacking the NYSESLAT- Reading and Writing Component Provider: LaSheanma Santiago, ENL Coordinator January 2019 Topic: Modifying the Writing Curriculum Provider: LaSheanma Santiago, ENL Coordinator February 2019 Topic: Effective Guided Practice in Writing for ELLs Provider: LaSheanma Santiago, ENL Coordinator March 2019 Topic: How to Prepare Students for the NYSESLAT Provider: LaSheanma Santiago, ENL Coordinator April 2019 Topic: Strategies to teach Math to ELLs Provider: Janet Parry Math Coach, LaSheanma Santiago-ENL Coordinator May 2019 Topic: Using Recipricol Teaching with ELLs Provider: LaSheanma Santiago-ENL Coordinator June 2019 Topic: Getting ELLs Ready for the Next Grade Level Provider: LaSheanma Santiago, ENL Coordinator The knowledge that the team gains as these PD sessions positively impact the progress of ELLs . The team also assesses the effectiveness of the implementation by sharing and having open conversations about how each of the learned experience is affecting students' learning and by the use of assessment data for ELLs in the school. Adjustments are then made as needed. All work will be observed and monitored by the administration. Teachers teaching in the Title III Immigrant Program will receive specific training on implementing the Lexia program and using the data to create lessons focused on student need. Below outlines specific professional learning series for teachers involved in our ELL After-school programs. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part C: Professional Development September 2019 Topic: How to start the school year with Lexia Provider: Christine Solomon, Lexia Learning Inc. November 2019 Topic: Using Data to determine order of skill building lessons Provider: Christine Solomon, Lexia Learning Inc. January 2019 Topic: Grouping students using lexia data and providing 1:1 Support Provider: Chistine Solomon, Lexia Learning Inc. March 2019 Topic: Adjusting Instruction for ELLs using Lexia Provider: Chistrine Solomon, Lexia Learning Inc. May 2019 Topic: Planning for the Summer and next year using data Provider: Christine Solomon, Lexia Learning, Inc. All professional development is at no cost to Title III Immigrant Funds. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental engagement activities will continue to increase our parents’ involvement within the district and our school, to inform our parents of the curriculum and the academic expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards, and support them in helping their children progress academically and achieve the English language proficiency. Below are some of the activities we have planned that we believe will foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs: Weekly Tuesday Workshops Throughout the month, workshops are offered every Tuesday for parents. Below are the big topics that are used to develop workshops for parents: Week 1-Positive Behavior Intervention System Week 2- Instruction & Assessment Week 3-Art Week 4- Nutrition & Fitness January 2019-June 2019 - Partnership with the Hispanic Federation which provides a program for parents to teach them how to improve their children's reading and writing skills at home, how to select grade appropriate text for your child, and engage in academic conversation with your child. -Partnership with the Office of Adult Continuing Education to provide English as a Second Language classes for parents. Classes occur Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday from 6-9pm. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities -Partnership with Advocates for Children of New York to provide workshops for immigrant parents around topics such as: Student Education Rights, Navigating the School System, and Services for LEP parents. - Parent Coordinator led workshops for parents - every month the parent coordinator has a workshop for parents including the parents of ELLs. The topics range from how to read together with their children, help their children with homework, work with the teacher of your children, the ABCs of discipline at home,and how to use technology to access child's data. Other topics will be generated as per parent requests or needs. Finally, teachers of ELLs will engage the ELLs and their parents in a variety of cultural field trips that will engage the students and parents in learning together. Trips will include museum visits, theater, parks, as well as exploring various historical areas of New York City (e.g., trips to NYC Aquarium, Museum of Natural History, Bronx Botanical Gardens, etc.). Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $17,005.00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 $1,889.00 0 0 0 18,894.00 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session for After school program n/a Materials for Parental Involvement n/a n/a n/a explained 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name P.S. 207 Borough Bronx School Number 207 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tara Obrien Coach Alex Kravitz, Literacy ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher LaSheanma Santiago Teacher/Subject Area Cristina Dillon, ESL Teacher/Subject Area Rosanna Pena, Bilingual Related-Service Provider Carmen Arias, Bilingual Speech Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Leigh Betancourt Coach Janet Parry, Mathematics School Counselor Ruth Torres Parent Elidia Flores Parent Coordinator Alexander Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Guerrero Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 59  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 278 Total number of ELLs 103 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 37.05% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2013-14 2017-18 K 1 2 3 4 1 1 Lang. SP SP Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 2 0 0 1 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1.Early Literacy Skills are measured via Fountas and Pinnell, Fundations Assessments, Estrellita and the HLA in Bilingual classes. The information helps us in the revision of the curriculum calendars and in planning differentiated instruction that will meet the students' needs, consider learning styles in the delivery of instruction in the classroom as well as design activities that scaffold students' learning to provide additional supports and promote rigor to extend their learning. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? At the beginning of the year, our administration designs a curriculum and assessment calendar that outlines dates for city, state, and school assessments. Our ENL Coordinator and Data Specialist work together to schedule, distribute, assess, analyze, 2018-19 CEP 60 and submit assessments given to our students. Throughout the year, we monitor the data and adjust instruction according to our assessment results. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Although the ultimate measure of success are the scores from the NYSESLAT, scores in each strand are examined and trends are identified that impact instructional decisions for the following school year. We measure student growth on an on-going basis by administering BOY, MOY and EOY assessments in the content areas as well as interim assessments. Utilizing these tools, we are able to get a picture of the whole child and can then determine what supports are working or not working. If the supports aren't sufficient, we then determine what changes should occur in our instructional program in order to increase achievement within our ELL population. According to our most recent NYSESLAT data, students are making progress in the reading and listening, but need more support in Writing. Our in-house periodic assessments also reflect a need to increase growth in writing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After teachers submit data at various points throughout the year, our administration team, including our ENL Coordinator and Data Specialist, analyze the data for trends and patterns. Grade level teams convene weekly to also look through the data and student work in order to think about what the data reveals and next steps to address gaps and misconceptions in student learning. Our team redistributes interventions that are in place such as small group intervention, Reading Rescue, and after-school to support student growth. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data is used to screen and monitor the progress of students. Data is derived from the following sources Fundations, Fountas & Pinnell, school-wide benchmark assessments, and NYCDOE assessments. There are also interim assessments in reading, writing, mathematics and thematic studies which include Science and Social Studies. The outcomes of the screening results and the assessments are analyzed and guide in outlining the strengths and needs of each individual student to determine in what tier they fall as well as how to best support them in Tiers 1,2 and 3. The information helps us design a Tier 2 program in addition to Tier 1 initiatives. Tier 1 is to provide the students with additional support in the areas of academic need (skills/concepts/strategies) utilizing UDL and DOK to extend the students' learning. The RTI team and the classroom teacher monitor the students progress (both academic & socio-emotional via assessments & observations)and decide on the next steps with skills/strategies and concepts via lessons, activities, student interest, varied modalities as entry points for instruction and programming designed to continue to support academic growth. Students who fall in Tier 2 are provided with daily small group intervention during specific times of the day. Tier 3 students meet with our Tier 3 team of teachers 1:1 throughout the week in specific areas of concern. Data is analyzed at specific points of the year and adjustments are made accordingly. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our primary assessment data that is used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs is data from NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. This data reveals that our students need the most support in Writing. This year we have begun using the HLA assessments and will use this data to help inform us of progress in our bilingual programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teacher teams meet weekly during common planning time to discuss data and analyze student work. During this time, teachers develop next steps and strategies that can be used to address areas of concerns for our students. In addition, our ELL Team meets twice a month to discuss compliance related items, data findings, and develop strategies that can be utilized to support ELLs in our various programs. All information is shared in a digital format and accessible to all staff in our school. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have a freestanding ENL program that serves students in grades K-2 and one Self-contained ENL class in Kindergarten. Students whose parents select for them to be apart of the ENL program are placed either in the ENL class on Kindergarten or one of the general education classes on 1st & 2nd grade and receive ENL services. Students are heterogeneously grouped in these classrooms and received the prescribed number of ENL minutes according to their ELL Level. All entering, emerging, and transitioning students receive 180 minutes a week of integrated ENL services during their literacy period. In addition, these students are grouped by level to receive 180 minutes a week of Stand Alone ENL services delivered by our ENL teacher. Students are the expanding level receive 90 minutes a week of Integrated ENL services during their literacy period alongside Commanding students. Expanding level students also receive 90 minutes a week of Stand Alone ENL services delivered by our ENL teacher. Lessons are differentiated according to product, process or content as well as students’ readiness levels, interests, and learning preferences. Differentiation would touch upon one or all of the following modalities: kinesthetic, tactile, auditory or visual learning styles via classroom activities designed to meet their needs. In planning lessons, varying background knowledge, environment, materials, method of presentation, student practice and evaluation are tailored to the differing abilities within each classroom. Bilingual and ENL teachers also have common preps to plan, receive staff development, and discuss issues that may affect specifically, the ENL population. There are preps and lunch periods given throughout the week that allow the teachers to plan with each of the grades (monolingual counterparts) represented in their classroom. b. TBE program. If applicable. We have a TBE program for our 1st and 2nd grade students. Students whose parents select this option are placed in our 1-2 split TBE class. In our TBE program, students receive instruction in their Native Language (spanish) during Math and their Content period. Students also have one period a day where they receive Native Language Arts instruction. The bilingual teachers uses a variety of differentiation methods to adjust instruction according to students ELL level. Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning students receive 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL instruction during the literacy block of instruction. These students also receive 180 minutes a week of Stand Alone ENL instruction during their Fundations period in the morning. Expanding students in the TBE program receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction during the literacy block and 90 minutes of Stand Alone ENL instruction during the Fundations period in the morning. This model allows the teacher to work with students on an individual basis, in small group instruction, and on whole class lessons. The teacher utilizes inquiry and project-based learning activities that require visuals and the use of hands-on manipulatives to build comprehension for ELLs. Bilingual and ENL teachers also have common preps to plan, receive staff development, and discuss issues that may affect specifically, the ENL population. There are preps and lunch periods given throughout the week that allow the teachers to plan with each of the grades (monolingual counterparts) represented in their classroom. c. DL program. If applicable. This year we began our Dual Language program in Kindergarten. Our Dual Language program is a side by side model with one general education teacher who teaches English in one classroom and one bilingual teacher who teaches Spanish in another classroom. Both classes are comprised of 50% ELLs and 50% of monolingual students. Classes follow a roller coaster model where they switch between English and Spanish for a portion of the day each day. Students receive Native Language Arts instruction when they are in the Spanish class. 2018-19 CEP 62  ELL students in the DL program at the Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning students receive 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL instruction during the literacy block of instruction while they are in their English class. These students are also pulled and grouped by level to receive 180 minutes a week of Stand Alone ENL instruction. Expanding students in the DL program receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction during the literacy block in the English classroom and are grouped with other students on their level to receive 90 minutes of Stand Alone ENL instruction. This model allows the teacher to work with students on an individual basis, in small group instruction, and on whole class lessons. The teacher utilizes inquiry and project-based learning activities that require visuals and the use of hands-on manipulatives to build comprehension for ELLs. Bilingual and ENL teachers also have common preps to plan, receive staff development, and discuss issues that may affect specifically, the ENL population. There are preps and lunch periods given throughout the week that allow the teachers to plan with each of the grades (monolingual counterparts) represented in their classroom. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The mandated number of instructional minutes is prescribed based on proficiency levels. Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes weekly of ENL instruction and Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes weekly using ENL methodologies (CALLA and TPR) and differentiated instruction. Former ELL's are seen by the ENL teacher to fulfill their 90 minutes of mandated services. Each teacher has a schedule posted which indicates the subject area being taught during that time period. In the bilingual classes, the schedule indicates the language of instruction for each subject area and the time frame for each period. In the monolingual classes with ENL students, the ENL periods are indicated based on the entitled instructional minutes for ENL. a. As stated earlier, the teacher’s posted schedule indicates the instructional minutes allotted for every period. Subject area is indicated on the schedule as well. In the bilingual classes, the schedule indicates the language of instruction for each subject area and the time frame for each period. In the monolingual classes with ENL students, the ENL periods are indicated based on the entitled instructional minutes for ENL. In the Bilingual classes, we allocated 5 periods for Home Language Arts (HLA) during the week. The other periods of the literacy block during the week are in English (ELA). As in the Monolingual classrooms, the components of the literacy block are followed. Those components may include: (1) Independent Reading: Students read a book at their independent level and the teacher confers with students during this time. (2) Interactive Writing: Teachers and children compose messages using a "shared pen" technique that involves children in the writing.(3) Shared Reading / Read Aloud: The teacher chooses a text, usually grade level or one grade higher, and reads the text aloud to the class. The teacher models fluent reading behavior, and the skills, strategies and habits of good readers. (4) Guided Reading: The teacher leads small group instruction based on assessment results. Classroom Libraries consist of children’s literature, including fiction, poetry and non-fiction books that appeal to a variety of different interests, and better engage students in reading and writing. In the bilingual classrooms, there are libraries of Spanish books in addition to libraries of English books. In addition, materials to support word study are provided in Spanish and English, e.g., word walls, letter charts. Technology has been infused in the classrooms with bilingual software, desktop computers, smart boards, document cameras and some laptops to support a variety of learning styles. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our Transitional Bilingual Education program, and our ENL standalone/integrated program, instruction in mathematics is delivered in English using the CALLA approach. The math period follows the workshop model as well. There is whole group instruction to introduce concepts/strategies or skills. Within the whole group mini-lesson, students are afforded an opportunity to turn and talk and practice the concept/strategy or skill they were taught during that period or in past lessons. Students then go off to practice in a variety of structures set by the teacher which can include any of the following: teacher directed instruction, cooperative group work, independent work or peer collaboration. At the end of the period, students will have a turn to share the strategy or process in working out the math problem or computation. This allows them to fortify and practice their oral language and auditory skills. Students are afforded visuals and hands-on materials to practice math as they 2018-19 CEP 63  move from the concrete to the representational and finally, the abstract in order to support their conservation of mathematical skills/strategies or concepts. Instruction in Bilingual classes is done in Language 1 and 2. During theme, (CALLA) which may focus on either or both social studies and/or science content, the students are engaged in project based or inquiry based instruction. They are introduced to the content using paralinguistics which support their varying language proficiencies during whole class instruction. Core Knowledge Language Arts is a component of our instructional program and is scaffolded to meet the needs of all learners. In addition whenever possible, hands-on Home Language Arts materials and visuals during teacher directed instruction, independent, peer or small group work are utilized as well. Our ENL students are also exposed to and engaged in four other specialty areas which include Art, Music, Science and Gym. Three out of the four specialty teachers are speakers of other languages which help support our ENL students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL students are assessed in their native language skills utilizing beginning of the year, middle of the year, end of the year in house assessments for our Bilingual classes. In addition, we utilize the Spanish F & P to assess students reading growth in Spanish. The HLA assessment is also used to assess students at the beginning and end of the year. In our bilingual classes, we are also implementing the Estrellita Home Language Arts Reading Program which serves as an initial screener and has evaluative components. Progress monitoring is also done throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Lessons are differentiated according to product, process or content as well as students’ readiness levels, interests, and learning preferences. Differentiation touches upon one or all of the following modalities: kinesthetic, tactile, auditory or visual learning styles. a. SIFE-We are a Pre-K-2 school and we currently do not have any SIFE students. If we were to receive SIFE students, appropriate planning to meet their developmental, linguistic and social needs would be paramount. They would be offered the support services and opportunities of any other English Language Learner in our school. In addition, supplemental services would be offered as well. b. Newcomer ELL's are supported via differentiated instruction, scaffolding and TPR and CALLA. These students also have an opportunity to be apart of our intervention groups after-school. c. This is not applicable to our school. We are a PreK-2nd grade school. d. This is not applicable to our school. We are PreK-2nd grade school. e. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL for 2 years after testing out. Students are still afforded testing accommodations such as extended time, use of HL glossaries, separate location, and testing in their HL for content areas. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In alignment with Universal Design for Learning and CALLA, all students including ELL students-SWD’s benefit from participating in tasks that are engaging and aligned with students zone of proximal development. Methods, materials and assessments are usable by all. Access to both information and learning is maximized. In addition, teachers present information and design learning tasks in a way that addresses the different modalities of learning-visual, kinesthetic, tactile and auditory. Balanced Literacy and the 5 Math Practices are utilized in all classrooms. In addition, Science and Social Studies are taught in cycles via project and inquiry based learning utilizing the Workshop Model as well. During each instructional period there is a component where teachers confer daily with different groups of students to assess individual learning and plan next steps for that child as well as the class as a whole. Students that are English Language Learners with disabilities are held to the same expectations as those without disabilities. The instructional approach may vary as per the students needs, IEP and learning modality. Students in self contained classes who may be performing on grade level in a particular academic area are mainstreamed into general education classes for that subject to address that particular student's strength. Materials used are 2018-19 CEP 64  Common Core Language Arts, Go Math, FOSS Science Units, Passport, TC, content based literature, informational texts, instructional videos, technology via desktops, laptops, Smartboards and document cameras. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Assessment data from all sources is examined. Curriculum maps also include a component with activities suggested for English Language Learner's and students with disabilities as these subgroups are held to the same expectations as those without disabilities. The instructional approach may vary as per the students needs, IEP and learning modality. Students in self contained classes who may be performing on grade level in a particular academic area are mainstreamed into general education classes for that subject to address that particular student's strength and foster academic growth. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. With respect to targeted interventions our school does the following: ELA/NLA-guided reading, Fundations double-dose for phonics (English), Reading Rescue in ELA, Estrellita small guided groups (Spanish), and Crazy 8 math (English). In addition, in math, social studies and science, teachers work with small groups during instructional time on targeted concepts, skills and strategies in English and Spanish as well. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the 2018-19 school year, we will be adding a 3rd grade to our school. ELL students in the 2nd grade TBE class will continue with TBE on the 3rd grade. Our Dual Language program will also expand from Kindergarten to include Kindergarten and 1st grade in the upcoming school year. Based on data and trends, we are considering purchasing the Imagine Learning program for our bilingual classes where students will have an opportunity to practice English skills in the context of reading and writing on the computer. We will also consider offering a Saturday academy for our 3rd grade students specifically focused on writing based on Writing being an area of improvement on the NYSESLAT. We will continue to monitor our students' progress in our programs in order to make revisions to the instructional program or curriculum maps that best support them to succeed both academically and socia-emotionally. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, we are not discontinuing any programs/services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. English Language Learners are always invited to participate in any supplemental or after school program being offered in our school. Our after-school programs are designed around supporting our ELLs language development. Services and extra-curricular activities are offered to all students based on student performance and need. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Currently, we have Smart Boards and document cameras in every classroom that teachers utilize as they infuse technology into the daily curriculum. In addition, there are desktop computers and ipads in all classrooms for children to work with to help strengthen their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills via various age-appropriate computer programs such as Scholastic Inc.’s, Clifford Learning. Brain Pop, Discovery Education, and Readers Theater. This school year our school purchased a site license for the Lexia Core 5 program, which focuses on student mastery in the 5 pillars of literacy. All students, including ELLs, have log-ins to access the site in school and at home. In addition, we have a licensed Music teacher that currently teaches our students how to keyboard. Every child practices the fundamentals weekly under the guidance of our music teacher. Content area instructional materials include dictionaries, picture cards, flash cards, center based activities including leveled instructional texts, articles, hands-on manipulatives as well 2018-19 CEP 65  as activities involving physical movement to reinforce concepts. Native Language Arts materials are also offered in Transitional Bilingual Education classes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our Transitional Bilingual Education Program, students develop their cognitive skills in their native language during their literacy periods in order to strengthen Language 1 which will help them in their acquisition of English. There is an ESL component, as well as content area instruction using CALLA during math and theme periods. Our TBE program includes a Native Language Arts Program to assist in the development of communication and academic skills specifically focusing on reading, writing, listening and speaking in their native language. During the first year, TBE students are expected to receive 60% of the classroom instruction in their native language and 40% in English. As students fortify their academic cognitive skills in Language 2, instructional time in Language 1 diminishes and English instructional time increases. Our Freestanding English as a Second Language program provides instruction in English with an emphasis on English language acquisition. Content area instruction is provided with a focus on ESL methodology utilizing CALLA and TPR. For entering and emerging students, the weekly minimum time allotment is 360 minutes, transitioning and expanding students receive a minimum of 180 minutes weekly. In Transitional Bilingual Education the weekly minimum time allotment for entering and emerging is 360 minutes, transitioning and expanding is 180 minutes. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services, supports and resources are aligned with students’ developmental age and grade level appropriateness. Currently, we are working with the Common Core Learning Standards, ESL State Standards, Response to Intervention and Universal Design for Learning to make sure students are appropriately supported. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Currently, we have Smart Boards and document cameras in every classroom that teachers utilize as they infuse technology into the daily curriculum. In addition, there are desktop computers in all classrooms for children to work with to help strengthen their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills via various age-appropriate computer programs such as Scholastic Inc.’s, Clifford Learning. Brain Pop, Discovery Education, Readers Theater and Core Knowledge Language Arts for listening and speaking. In addition, we have a licensed Music teacher that currently teaches our students how to keyboard. Every child has access to his or her own keyboard and practices the fundamentals weekly under the guidance of our music teacher. Content area instructional materials include dictionaries, picture cards, flash cards, center based activities as well as leveled instructional texts, articles, hands-on manipulatives as well as activities involving physical movement to reinforce concepts. Native Language Arts materials are also offered in Transitional Bilingual Education classes. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the beginning of the school year, parents of all incoming Kindergarteners are invited to attend an orientation session. At this information session, children and parents are welcome into our school to meet our staff, tour the Kindergarten classrooms and become familiar with our environment. Parents are provided with information about our Dual Language program and are able to express interest to have their child in the program. Parents also have the opportunity to ask any questions they may have. In the beginning of September and as students are newly enrolled, parents are provided with an orientation by our ENL Coordinator that focuses on ELL programs in NYC as well as in our school, they see a video that gives information about the program, and they are also given information about ways to assist their ELL student in becoming familiar with school expectations and systems. Newly enrolled ELLs are placed in the parents program choice and given a partner to assist them with adjusting to classroom expectations. We also have bilingual staff on board who provide support to students in the classroom. Our bilingual social worker visits 2018-19 CEP 66  students and creates small groups throughout the year to help them assimilate to our school culture. She also meets with the parents to provide them with additional support and tips on how to best support their child during the assimilation process as well as recommend community resources after school for both parents and children. We also have specialty teachers that are bilingual speakers who can support students when they attend their specialty class (music, art and science). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are a Pre-K to 2nd grade Early Childhood school. We do not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our Dual Language program is a side by side model with one general education teacher who teaches English in one classroom and one bilingual teacher who teaches Spanish in another classroom. Both classes are comprised of 50% ELLs and 50% of monolingual students. Classes follow a roller coaster model where they switch between English and Spanish for a portion of the day each day. Students receive Native Language Arts instruction when they are in the Spanish class. Emergent Literacy skills are taught in a simultaneous manner. ELL students in the DL program at the Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning students receive 180 minutes a week of Integrated ENL instruction during the literacy block of instruction while they are in their English class. These students are also pulled and grouped by level to receive 180 minutes a week of Stand Alone ENL instruction. Expanding students in the DL program receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction during the literacy block in the English classroom and are grouped with other students on their level to receive 90 minutes of Stand Alone ENL instruction. This model allows the teacher to work with students on an individual basis, in small group instruction, and on whole class lessons. The teacher utilizes inquiry and project-based learning activities that require visuals and the use of hands-on manipulatives to build comprehension for ELLs. Bilingual and ENL teachers also have common preps to plan, receive staff development, and discuss issues that may affect specifically, the ENL population. There are preps and lunch periods given throughout the week that allow the teachers to plan with each of the grades (monolingual counterparts) represented in their classroom. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teacher team meetings throughout the school year offer teachers opportunities to engage in professional development opportunities along with their peers in monolingual classrooms. Also, as per contract, Professional Development Mondays have a focus on oral language and discussions as well as analyzing work of ENL students. Our ENL Coordinator also models in classrooms and articulates with staff on a regular basis and offers professional development on NYSESLAT preparation to parents and staff as well. We will also be connecting strategies taught during the writing block of literacy to types of writing for NYSESLAT. Along with this, work will continue developing better listening comprehension needed for the NYSESLAT. Students 2018-19 CEP 67  will engage in practice where they would have to listen to an adult other than the teacher to respond to their questions and continue creating instructional opportunities for children to listen and respond to other native speaking adults. Assistant Principals, Educational Assistants, Social Workers, Special Education teachers, Psychologists, Occupational/Physical Therapists, Speech Therapists, our Secretary and our Parent Coordinator also seek support from our Borough Field Office as well as seeking out professional opportunities from the Office of English Language Learner's. In addition, staff is supported in house by our Math, Data and Literacy coaches, our Bilingual Social Worker and our Assistant Principal. Our entire teaching staff including ENL and Bilingual teachers are immersed in deepening our alignment to the CCLS by continuing to build upon the performance tasks embedded in our K-2 curriculum units by integrating rigorous performance tasks in all curriculum ELA, social studies, science, and math units across disciplines in order to support students to make connections, provide multiple entry points, and improve performance results. Based on the students’ results from the implementation of last year’s performance tasks, we were able to use the information to refine our curriculum maps and tasks to meet students’ needs with a specific focus on scaffolding instruction to support our ELL’s and SWD’s. Through Teacher Team meetings and classroom learning walks, teachers, together with administration, continue to analyze students’ results for gap analysis, plan, discuss gaps in implementation of CCLS in curriculum maps, review and align assessments, and create next steps. The unit performance tasks integrate cross curricular subjects and build upon the interdisciplinary connections across reading, writing and theme subjects in order to afford students opportunities to build and draw upon an increased content knowledge base. The literacy cross curricular and math performance tasks are designed as cumulative unit assessments to measure and monitor students’ understanding and application of skills and strategies across disciplines resulting in cognitively challenging tasks. The unit performance tasks also serve as interim progress monitoring measurements in order to move students towards achievement of learning target end year goals. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school plans Professional Development on ELL specific topics for all teachers totaling 15 hours yearly. Bilingual/ENL teachers receive professional development with our ENL Coordinator on specific ELL related content and they also attend outside Professional Development on ELL specific topics offered by the Office of English Language Learners, FSC, and other outside organizations. In an effort to continue building capacity from within, some of these topics are then turn keyed to all teachers in our building by our Bilingual/ENL staff. Agendas and sign in sheets for all in house and outside PD are maintained by the coaches, Principal and teachers themselves for record keeping purposes. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to the generally required meetings, our school will be meeting individually with parents/guardians of ELLs at least once a year to discuss the following: -student's language development process -English Language proficiency assessment results -language development needs in all content areas. Our school will utilize the Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement block of time after school to ensure that these individual parent meetings for all ELLs occur. Records for individual meetings with ELL parents are documented via sign in sheet as stated in previous sections of this report. Parent's signature, date of meeting as well as reason for meeting will be included. In addition, the language of preference for 2018-19 CEP 68  each individual parent will be notated as well on the same sign in sheet. Phone calls will be logged as well in addition to any correspondence sent out via US Mail. Any and all outreach attempts will be documented and maintained by the ENL coordinator. Parents will be accommodated as needed to ensure there is sufficient communication with them regarding their childs Academic, Lingusitic and Social/Emotional progress. There will also be scheduling flexibility so that parents are able to attend meetings as necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our Parent Association along with our Parent Coordinator have scheduled activities and workshops to bring guest speakers from the community to present topics of interest and need to the parents, hold meetings to increase parent involvement, informational sessions about programs and school life at PS 207 and recruiting parents as school volunteers. There is a monthly calendar sent to parents outlining school and parent activities as well as a curriculum overview. The PA also has a bulletin board where pertinent information and special events is posted. Our school sends notices discussing upcoming events and curriculum activities during the month. Monthly school-wide celebrations as well as literacy and culminating activities for other curriculum areas create opportunities for parents to join their children during the school day. Our annual school wide events such as Multicultural Day, Power of Our Words Day, Assemblies, Family Fun Nights, Arts Expo, Celebrating Cultural Diversity, 100 Days of School, Science Expo, Curriculum Orientation, PTC, Open School Week, Poem In Your Pocket Day and Award Ceremonies, Attendance ceremonies, etc. are well received and parents participate. Student Portfolio Share also offer the parents opportunities to partake in their child’s school life. We continue strengthening our bonds with our families, our school staff provides on-going workshops that are math and literacy based supporting current units of study and other topics support parents with their child’s learning at home. There is also a monthly workshop for parents of English Language Learners run by our ENL Coordinator, Universal Literacy Coach, and/or Parent Coordinator where translations are provided. These workshops provide a review of the different units of study currently underway in our school, explained by subject and grade level. In these workshops, we address different topics of interest such as homework help, math games, test prep, read alouds and assistance in helping parents apply for a New York Public Library card. There is also a question and answer component. The math coach provides workshops for the parents on the current units with activities that parents can do at home to support their children. The Attendance Committee also holds bi-monthly workshops, and schedules individual meetings with parents regarding attendance issues. The Social Worker provide workshops for parents on Character Education and Discipline. The school Social Worker, our School psychologist are bilingual which serves as a great resource in communicating and providing help to our parents. 2. Our school has partnered with the following Community Based Organizations to date: RCSN-Resources for Children with Special Needs, Hispanic Federation-Pathways to Academic Excellence, NYCDOE Adult Ed and NYC Fire Department-Fire Safety. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tara Obrien, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 207 School DBN: 10x207 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Tara Obrien Title Principal Leigh Betancourt Assistant Principal Alexander Rodriguez Parent Coordinator LaSheanma Santiago ENL/Bilingual Teacher Elidia Flores Parent Cristina Dillon, ESL Teacher/Subject Area Rosanna Pena, Bil Teacher/Subject Area Janet Parry Alexandra Kravitz Coach Coach Ruth Torres School Counselor Maribel Hulla Maria Guerrero Carmen Arias, Bilingual Speech Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Service Provider Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 01/30/18 01/30/18 01/30/18 01/30/18 01/30/18 01/30/18 01/30/18 01/30/18 01/30/18 01/30/18 01/30/18 2018-19 CEP 71  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x207 School Name: P.S. 207 Superintendent: Maribel Torres- The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Alex Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When parents enter our school and are having difficulty communicating with schools staff we use the mat entitled, "I am a parent and I speak…" to determine their native language. This mat provides 9 different options of languages spoken and the parent merely points to the language they speak. Once their language is determined, if there is no one on staff in our school building that speaks this language, we reach out to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for further assistance in helping this parent get the information they are seeking. The HLIS is given to them in their native language unless it is unavailable. If this is the case, once again we refer back to the Translation and Interpretation Unit to have a translator walk them through an English Home Language Survey with question by question guidance in their native language. Parents preferred language to receive information from the school is recorded into ATS and any paperwork going to the home or phone messages are translated via the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Home Language is assessed through the results of the Home Language Survey, needs assessment survey administered to parents, interest inventories administered to parents as well as feedback from parent workshops, oral interviews, on site registration, ESL and bilingual staff assessment of parents at point of entry and on-going articulation. 2018-19 CEP 72  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1. English 2. Spanish 3. Arabic 4. Albanian 5. Chinese English-90% Spanish-8% Arabic-2% Preferred languages in our school for written communication is as follows: 1. English 2. Spanish 3. Arabic Data on preferred languages for both written and oral communication was taken from the Adult Preferred Language Report(RAPL) in ATS. English-90% Spanish-8% Arabic-2% Preferred languages in our school for oral communication is as follows: 1. English 2. Spanish 3. Arabic 4. Albanian 5. Chinese Data on preferred languages for both written and oral communication was taken from the Adult Preferred Language Report(RAPL) in ATS. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 73  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families Parent Handbook September Monthly Announcements about holidays, school meetings, and workshops Monthly parent calendars October November December January February March April May June plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents that need to be translated from English to Spanish are translated by our parent coordinator. Translation into other languages are sent to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Our documents are in soft copy and do not change much from year to year, so we are able to receive a timely translation from the Translation and Interpretation Unit of change of dates, names, or venue information that we have to update on our monthly communications. Documents are sent at least a month in advance for translation. 2018-19 CEP 74  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Curriculum Night Parent Teacher Conference Monthly Parent Workshops ELL Parent Info. Sessions Winter Student Show Spring Student Show Graduation plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our school hires translators from a translation company to be apart of these scheduled meetings. During parent teacher conferences, teachers are given the number to the Translation Unit where they can have the meeting translated for the parent over the phone. September November, March, May September-June September-June December May June 2018-19 CEP 75  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, a translated message will be disseminated to all parents via our school messenger. Translated fliers will be created by our school secretary or parent coordinator to be hung outside to provide parents with needed information. If necessary, all teachers and additional staff carry emergency contact information for every student during emergencies. Once staff and students are in a safe place and settled, staff will also make phone calls to parents to alert them of emergencies. Bilingual staff will assist with phone translation in the event of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All of our staff are trained yearly on all Chancellor Regulations and Policies. On the first day that staff report to work, our administrative team will review goals, resources, and answer questions about Chancellor's Regulation A-663. Our staff receives a handbook in the beginning of the school year, that outlines policies, procedures, and answers questions they may have about services available in our school. Chancellor's Regulations are apart of that packet and our Language Translation and Interpretation Plan is also given to them. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Based on the above, the staff at PS 207 will provide written and oral translation services as needed. If a need arises and we do not have the personnel with the language of need, we will contact the Borough Field Office parent center for their assistance or DOE translation unit. We will also use the letters translated for general notices from the NYCDOE website. School notices and letters to parents are sent home in more than one language. School calendars go home on a monthly basis in more than one language in addition to the Principal's newsletter. Oral interviews, on site registration, ESL and bilingual staff, at point of entry and on-going, will be provided to translate at a given point in time when the need is indicated, as well as office staff. Videos for NYCDOE information and the packet received from the NYCDOE will be utilized. The services will be provided by the school secretaries, school aides, paraprofessionals, bilingual and/or ESL teachers, as well as any other bilingual staff member. The school phone messenger also helps support parents who speak other languages, in their native language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback from parents is ongoing and our school provides opportunities for parents to communicate their thoughts on the quality and availability of services. Our primary source of information is the yearly citywide Parent Survey. 2018-19 CEP 76  Parents also communicate via the School Leadership Team as our Parents Association members sit in on all meetings and provide feedback on their constituency. 2018-19 CEP 77 
