2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X221 School Name: SOUTH BRONX PREPARATORY: A COLLEGE BOARD SCHOOL Principal: ELLEN REDDON FLANAGAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information South Bronx Preparatory 07X221 School Number (DBN): 320700011221 6-12 360 East 145th Street Bronx NY 10454 718292 2211 Phone Number: 718 292 2172 Fax: Ellen Flanagan eflanag2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Email Address: Dr. Ellen Flanagan Steven Tsokanos Luz Lopez Scott Galassi TaneeshaCrawford Steven Pagan, JasmineMorel Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dina Brown District Information Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Room 842A, Bronx, NY 10458 cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5834 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx (718) 828-6280 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 741-5834 Phone Number: (718) 828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ellen Flanagan Steven Tsokanos Luz Lopez TaneeshaCrawford Danita King Steven Pagan PresslieNorman Dina Brown BintaHinson Scott Galassi Stephan Hasson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, Bronx Works Member/CSA Member/UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) JariusToogood ShenquaStevens DeidraGibbs MaritzaBatista AnfisaRamos JanixaTorres HishamSaleh Member/UFT Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission is to create a learning environment that is inclusive of all members of the school community. Our goal is to educate the whole child, socially, emotionally, and intellectually. Our partner organizations have the same beliefs that a strong relationship between students and adults are the core to the success of the individual student. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The school community of South Bronx Preparatory is committed to creating and maintaining an environment that fosters student independence and persistence beyond high school by creating a supportive and structured environment. SBP was founded in 2004 and has worked every year to support our students from the surrounding community using small group learning and approaching each student from a social-emotional learning perspective. We are a Title I school serving the students in the surrounding housing projects. We have about 676 students, averaging about a 100 per grade level. Our special education population is at 26% and 12% ELL. We are continuing as a Showcase School for 2018-2019 for Culture and Community. We have partnerships with PowerMyLearning.org, Lincoln Center for the Arts, Urban Advantage for the Sciences, Google for Education, and Syracuse University. These partnerships offer on site coaching, computers for our 6th grade students and science opportunities like PD for teachers and museum visits for students and their families. We are also offering AP Computer Science through Computer Science 4 All and AP Government. For the Computer Science 4 All, we get two volunteers to work in the classroom with our introduction to coding teacher and a coach that will work with our AP and Intro teachers. We partner with College Access for All (second year in middle school and first year in high school). We are building relationships with organizations that will allow individual student success and college readiness. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have a 25% special education population and a growing ELL population that we address via targeted instruction and individual and teacher development to address student needs. Our SPED population has a range of disabilities from learning disability, emotionally disturbed, Other Health Impairment (OHI) or Speech-Language Impairment. SWD students receive modifications to curriculum in appropriate setting, either ICT or self-contained. As we continue to focus in on entry points for our special needs population, we are also improving on addressing the needs of our high level learners or ‘differentiating up' based on feedback from quality review and Principal Performance Observation (PPO) visits. This is also aligned to our student performance trends which point to providing access points for all types of learners. Our ELL teachers work with students with language acquisition and modifiying curriculum tailored to individual student needs. The majority of our ELL students are expanding (46), transitioning (16), emerging (5), and entering (1) following closely behind. We currently have 74 students in temporary housing. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has made great progress in Rigorous Instruction by aligning curriculum/units to the Common Core Learning Standards. For the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to refine and revise teacher pedagogy to increase student achievement, increase student to student dialogue and increase parental and community involvement and building teacher capacity. We are building strong family community ties by creating parent volunteer days. We provide a supportive environment and dedicated professional learning time for teachers. We have made the most progress in building and maintaining a culture of mutual respect and trust. We are working toward creating classrooms that are responsive to student needs at each level. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X221 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 659 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 41 39 19 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 93.6% % Reduced Lunch 7.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 71.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.26 4% 23% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 37.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 99% 97% 92.3% 24.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 177 174 92.0% 3.2% 26.7% 25.0% 1.5% 0.6% 6 31% 5.5 26.1% 32% 97% 97% 93.8% 14% N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have been working on curriculum alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) for the past six years. The first three years we focused on aligning assessments to the CCLS. Then, we focused on implementing the suggested units from the citywide instructional expectations. Currently, we are in the process of refining and revising via a feedback process derived from a review of the unit plans we collect. Our focus includes continued improvement in entry points, evidence of rigor, high level questions from the depth of knowledge (DOK) chart and curricular alignment to support the framework goals of rigorous instruction and collaborative teachers. We design professional development opportunities that allowed for collegial feedback on lesson and unit plans using a protocol. Teachers have been able to work with a diverse group of colleagues (from different content areas) to get feedback to address collaborative professional feedback. Additionally, the curriculum committee will be using a modified tri-state rubric to strategically look at first and second year teachers’ unit plans as well as teachers up for tenure to offer strategic feedback around creating rigorous tasks and modifications for all learners. By May of 2019, administration and all teachers will have participated in a curriculum review using the tri-state rubric to offer feedback in tandem with the instructional leads/internal coaches. We will use our Quality Review and NYC School Survey to monitor these outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of targeted professional development and observation feedback, by June 2019, there will be a 3% increase (from 77% to 80%) in the number of teachers who say that students build on each others' ideas during class discussions on the School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers meet weekly in teams (Vertical, Grade Level, and ICT/Interdisciplinary, Feedback Facilitator). Curriculum committee feedback to teachers up for tenure in addition to first and second year teachers using the tri-state rubric. Teacher teams September 2018 – June 2019 Teacher team leaders, model teachers, Admin (weekly on Wednesday) Teacher teams October 2018 – May 2019 Teacher team leaders, Admin (weekly) Teacher teams September2018 – June 2019 Teacher team leaders, model teachers, Admin Teacher teams, PML coach, Lincoln Center, Urban Advantage September, 2018 – June 2019 Teacher team leaders, Admin, PML personnel (weekly meetings with coaches) Curriculum committee, administration, teacher leaders, and grade/vertical team leaders. For middle school, we will also utilize the external coaches from PowerMyLearning, Urban Advantage and Lincoln Center. Weekly grade team check-ins, monthly vertical team meetings, lesson and unit plan revision protocols to guide the peer feedback process. The PML coach meets weekly with middle school math teachers to develop teaching strategies and design units that are common core aligned. All revisions ensure that there are entry points which address all levels of learning. ICT partners meet bi-monthly to adjust curriculum delivery strategies for students with special needs. ELL teachers conduct monthly PD sessions for whole staff to support the needs of the ELL students. Internal instructional coaches for middle school science. The PML coach and program for middle school math come from a grant. The PML coach will be working with the middle school math, and this year the middle school science department on developing teaching strategies that support a blended learning classroom and are CCLS-aligned. Our partnership with Lincoln Center provides teaching artists to collaborate in and out of the classroom with our middle school social studies teachers. 100% of first year, second year and tenure-year teachers will take part in a curriculum review with members of the curriculum committee to review and revise practice based on the feedback delivered at the review. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 13  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To strengthen family ties we are expanding our parent communication using both online platforms and face to face opportunities. Continuous online dialogue with parents using School Messenger, Jupiter Grades and our Family Playlists via Power My Learning, Family Science outings with Urban Advantage and evening celebrations and performances with Lincoln Center. We have face to face family engagement during parent-teachers conferences and our Lincoln Center partnership, and each grade team is organizing Parent Nights for families to socialize while they learn alongside their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This will be added to the PD calendar, PML coach and admin team will strategize to implement the system, PML coach will be on site 45 days in the calendar year. Students in the PML classes (6-8 math) are able to use laptops. Students in 10, 11th and 12th grade will have individual Chromebooks as a pilot for this school year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor instructional improvement in student work via twice-monthly Vertical Team meetings using student work samples across the vertical plane to monitor conceptual understanding and to revise instruction. Our weekly Grade Team meetings (September 2018-June2019) monitor student social and emotional development and parental involvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Administration and Teacher Leader/Peer Review team measure the progress during the weekly Curriculum Reviews. in order to see if instructional and planning feedback is being implemented into the unit and daily lesson plans. Additionally, we will review internal survey results from staff feedback/exit slips. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? South Bronx Preparatory provides a supportive learning environment that provides students with courses that meet their academic needs. SBP's strengths are offering access to AP classes in English, studio art, Spanish and Psychology and Computer Science via CS4All. Additionally, we have been able to offer a Syracuse University Project Advance (SUPA) English course for the past three years and adding a SUPA Human Development and Sport, offering students the potential to earn three college credits. These strengths highlight a supportive learning environment built on trust and rigorous instruction. All students a have access to our AP offerings with no limitations imposed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of an increase in course offerings and monitoring the progress of students in these classes, by June 2019 there will be a 3% increase (from 40% to 43%) in the number of students graduating college ready using CUNY's standards of measure. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Weekly Curriculum Reviews for teachers in order to peer review depth and rigor of current unit plans. Peer Reviewed units designed for more students to be prepared to take advanced courses. Scheduled reviews twice in SY 2018-2019 by partnering organizations: Syracuse University, CS4All, TEALS. Teachers Administration Targeted monthly meetings with teachers of advanced courses on revising curriculum to reach toward the advanced coursework to include more AP classes, increased College Now enrollment, and by offering professional development and support for the teachers in planning for those courses. (Quality Review indicator 1.4). Professional development topics that will include increased discourse, discussion, and levels of questioning. Professional development for teachers to build stronger communication ties to families twice a week. Outreach to parents through online systems, PD for parents to learn our communication systems daily. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 5, 2018 – June 26, 2019 September 5, 2018 – June 26, 2019 Teacher/Peer Review team, AP, Principal Curriculum Committee, administration Teachers Administration Teachers Administration September 5, 2018 – June 26 2019 Teacher Leaders, administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Based on our learning environment survey, we will offer parents more opportunities to become part of the community on a day to day basis. With our parent coordinator, admin and counseling staff we will build opportunities for parents to engage during the school day. Each grade team has added three additional parent volunteer dates - Fall 2018, Winter 2019, Spring 2019 (determined by grade level outreach to parents) where they will be asked to come into the school and participate in daily instruction or planned activities. Parents will also meet with the parent coordinator to learn about the framework for great schools. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 16  Professional learning will be built into the PL calendar. Administration will work with teachers via curriculum reviews and Advance informal/formal ratings. CS4All is grant driven and PD/per session comes with the grant for our two participating teachers. SUPA PD is funded by Syracuse University. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor the progress three times using in-house surveys in November 30, March 14 and June 17th with in-house surveys. Survey results will dictate revisions to the professional learning offered. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Danielson Framework observation reports will be reviewed for each teacher after each of our instructional rounds to ensure that PL is both meeting the needs of teachers and building on their strengths in the classroom (6 dates: November, December, January, March, May, June). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on 2018 QR indicator 1.2 feedback and the Collaborative Teacher Framework For Greater Schools Element, we will develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching. In order to move teacher practice for all teachers and to measure growth from September 2018 to June 2019, we will follow a schedule of observations that will be a maximum of six classroom observations per teacher between October 2018 and May 2019. Data will be collected via formal/informal teacher observations, curriculum reviews and using feedback facilitator data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, as a result of involvement in Showcase Schools and outside professional development, 90% of all teachers will respond positively to questions from the NYC School Survey around professional development experiences, including opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools, as measured by a school-created questionnaire/survey. 2018-19 CEP 18 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Admin Team, all staff September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 (6 instructional rounds each lasting 3-4 week). All teachers, science, math September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Admin Team, all staff Admin, teachers (weekly meetings) September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 (norming 1 week in September, January and May). September 5, 2018 - June 26, 2019 (once weekly) Admin Team, all staff Admin Team, all staff, model teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We have created a strategic system of teacher evaluation that is equitable and cyclical. Each school administrator has a Home Group of teachers who will receive official evaluations via Advance from them which also contribute to the supportive environment. The Home Group teachers will receive a rating in Advance from their Home Group Administrator based on a collective set of informal observations conducted by all other Administrators during the course of the observation cycle. We are expanding our work with CARP by adding our high school science team for school year 2018-2019. This increases the intervisitations at SBP and outside the building and inquiry based learning. They meet with colleagues throughout the city four times annually, and share practices with colleagues in-house as well as outside the school. The Administrative Team meets to norm/evaluate their own process during the Observation Cycle before the Home Group Administrator inputs the final rating in Advance, followed by the meeting with the teachers to discuss the rating and sign off on receiving the rating. Feedback is delivered in person based on observed teacher practice and used to develop professional development opportunities. Teachers conduct intervistations and we support our FSC with outside teacher visitations for in math and science for school year 2018-2019. The focus is on questioning, albeit without evaluating colleagues. Admin Team, all staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to Family Night on 9.20.18 and will learn about our expanded parent volunteer dates and partnerships with outside organizations. They will also learn about our collaborative teacher strategies and how it 2018-19 CEP 19  affects the individual classrooms. We are extending our Family Playlist pilot to all middle school grades through our partnership with Power My Learning. Our parents will learn more about this at the Family Session on Saturday, October 20th. The schedule of shows at Lincoln Center (2 per grade, 2 family events) so our parents can participate (both on field trips and in school performances). Each grade team will continue with their three parent engagement events. Parents, teachers and students interact virtually on learning concepts at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for team leaders beyond work hours, PD sessions for team leaders, PD sessions for teachers (within PD calendar). Teacher teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will survey parents each of the three times they are attend sessions. One survey per trimester. Internal surveys after each parent teacher conference: September 2018, December 2018, March, and May 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use in house survey data modeled on the NYC School survey to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to encourage teacher leadership and collaborative teachers, we need to encourage dialogue around creating classroom environments that are responsive to students cultural backgrounds. Teacher leadership improvement is based on results from 2017-2018 NYC School Survey of Teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of the school offering teacher leaders professional development opportunities around creating curriculum and classroom practices that are culturally responsive to all student backgrounds including our unintended biases, by June of 2019, there will be a 6% increase (from 84% to to 90%) on the School survey to the question that asks teachers if they received support on how to incorporate students' cultural and linguistic backgrounds in their practice. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The instructional council (administration and teacher leaders) meets weekly, which both facilitates improved instructional practice, promotes intervisitations, teacher leadership, and collegial review, with our instructional leadership team as the leaders of this initiative. This promotes collaborative ownership of the PD agendas. Based on Classroom observations, feedback facilitator leaders will work on-on-one with members of their groups on differentiating instruction for all high needs students. Teacher leaders (feedback facilitators) work with specific feedback from administrative team to support teacher practice. Facilitators of SpEd teachers design specific feedback for teachere to meet needs of high needs students. A needs assessment/baseline will be given at the start of the year to students and teachers in order to identify gaps of understanding around diversity. Professional learning opportunities and discourse will be planned from those needs and survey results. Our teacher leaders have agreed to be trained to have those conversations/dialogue with both teachers and students. Teachers and students will be asked to complete an endline in June 2019. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? SBP feedback facilitators, teachers, admin September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Admin, Teacher Leaders, Feedback facilitator leaders (weekly) SBP learning Partners, teachers, admin September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 Admin, Teacher Leaders, Feedback facilitator leaders (monthly) SBP learning Partners, teachers, admin September 5, 2018 and June 26, 2019 Admin, Teacher Leaders, feedback facilitator leaders (teacher baseline and endline data). September 5, 2018 and June 26, 2019 Admin, Teacher Leaders/model teachers We will provide ongoing professional learning opportunities for teachers to engage in conversations led by our model teachers. Learning walks are conducted three times (October, March, May) a year for each vertical team with a teacher alongside administration. Teachers, teacher leaders, admin 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to participate and learn about the SBP family relationships during our Family Night on 9.30.18 by teachers, administration and our community based organization, BronxWorks. We will will continue with our parent participation in bi-monthly SLT meetings in addition to our increase efforts to reach parents via monthly 2018-19 CEP 22  meetings. Parents will learn about effective school leadership in a series with the principal, "coffee with the principal" informal sessions and volunteer opportunities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use per session money for hours spent outside the work day for our Feedback Facilitator leaders to meet and attend PD. Time is built into the PD calendar for teacher/LP meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Weekly instructional council meetings to review feedback and observation information. Weekly feedback will be reviewed for revision of professional learning sessions on a monthly basis and reviewed throughout the year. This will be used to create goals and target learning objectives in planning professional learning opportunities for teachers and creating opportunities for student success. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use data from curriculum reviews (tri-state rubric) and exit slips. Feedback from classroom observations based on Danielson will be used to measure improvement post-feedback. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on feedback from parents on the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, 42% of parents say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. SBP's strengths lie in being able to communicate using technology with our busy parents. They appreciate the online grading system - Jupiter Grades and Google for education. We will increase our parent engagement by utilizing our Jupiter Grades system. Using the data from the parent survey, we have increased the frequency of communication with parents on students’ academic progress. Through our grant with Lincoln Center we hosted two performances with a full catered dinner after for our parents and students. We aim to increase our parent participation in school functions and volunteer opportunities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, we will increase our parental volunteer opportunities in the school from 42% to 45% based on the Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will increase communication on a more consistent basis with parents during this built in time during the school day. Our grade reporting system is Jupiter Grades which allows us to have teachers and parents communicate via the website and to receive information directly from the classroom teachers via texts and emails. Parents will have a Jupiter Grades training during our Family Night on 9.30.18. With this increased communication, we are also creating in-person opportunities via increased parent-teacher conferences and marking period award ceremonies. Monday professional development affords teachers the time to meet parents, communicate via email and Jupiter Grades. We will utilize the School Messenger system and Jupiter Grades to increase communication with parents, so there is a school wide system in place to get the messages out to parents. Each grade team (6-12) will plan once/trimester events that ask for parent volunteers, from showcasing student work to field days. Parent coordinator will check in with parents at monthly SLT meetings. We will be able to check JupiterGrades log on information for all parents monthly to be reviewed throughout the year. Our partnership with PML will expand to build direct contact with all parents for various parental events in the school building. The Family Playlist gives the opportunity for students to share their content knowledge with a parent/guardian at home. Parents provide feedback to the teacher after working with their child. Our partnership with Urban Advantage will build more contact with parents as they offer family field trip opportunities to the American Museum of Natural History. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff, Admin Parents, teachers September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 (log ins monitored at each monthly SLT meeting) Parents, Teachers September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 All staff, Admin Parents, Teachers, PML partners September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 All staff, Admin, PML partners September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 All staff, Admin, Urban Advantage partners Urban Advantage, teachers, parents, students If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Urban Advantage, Lincoln Center, PML and Bronx Works. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Annual purchase of Jupiter Grades learning management system; technology coordinator; Parent Engagement hours weekly. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. From the January review we will determine if parents need targeted learning sessions in accessing the information. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Jupiter grade log on information from parents and students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student identified by their teachers/counselors as below grade level in this area. Student identified by their teachers/counselors as below grade level in this area. Student identified by their teachers/counselors as below grade level in this area. Social Studies Student identified by their teachers/counselors Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After school tutoring program Achieve 3000 During school day/After school Small group targeted intervention Small group differentiated/targeted intervention Small group/blended classroom During the school day/After School Regents Review ELR- small group focused on targeted interventions centered around college readiness IXL.com tutoring program online Powermylearning.org online math learning Regents Review Math Lab SAT Prep After school tutoring One-to-one counseling During school day/after school Regents Review Small group instruction Lab Report Writing Blended Learning scientific investigation After school tutoring Small group instruction Regents Review During school/after school 2018-19 CEP 27  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Blended learning One-on-one counseling; group counseling as below grade level in this area. Student identified by their teachers/counselors as need additional academic and/or behavioral supports. Small group instruction During school day/ After school 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 6 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. At-risk counseling, emergency uniform supplies, school supplies, one-on-one counseling. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Staff at South Bronx Preparatory is offered a variety of supports for teachers and differentiated learning opportunities: a) Inquiry: With action research as its focal point, teachers meet together monthly to review data, look at student work, and get focused, protocol-driven feedback from their colleagues. b) Professional Learning Plan: Our PL calendar was based on continual feedback from our teachers. We have Wednesday’s from 1:30-3:10pm in which to offer a variety of PL experiences, from grade team meetings to vertical team meetings to time with instructional coaches for knowledge sharing as well as time to co-plan. All meetings are designed to align practice to school goals c) Our hiring protocol for hiring new teachers includes an interview with staff and students in a multi-step process. Prospective teachers who pass initial benchmarks are asked to perform a demonstration lesson. Students who were involved in the lesson are asked to debrief with the hiring committee to give feedback on their experience – social/emotional as well as intellectual. d) Mentoring program where colleagues pair up with new teachers to the school to offer feedback and support to the teachers both inside and outside of the classroom. e) Lunch and Learn: for special education department in ensuring that our students’ needs are met through the use of various instructional strategies and the use of the students’ IEP. f) Partnerships with NYC Fellows, Spring Apprenticeship Program and Summer Fellow Program, Teachers College: Columbia University and Lehman College have helped in recruiting teachers by hosting student teacher. g) Increasing Professional Practices, Relationships and Responsibilities: Outside professional development for teachers provided by Teachers College, iLearn NYC and Power My Learning. h) Collaborative Action Research Project (CARP): We are expanding the inquiry based learning work from our math department in 2017-2018 to include both our math and science department for the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 CEP 31  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We have a Professional Development plan that is designed to meet the needs of all teachers and students in developing lesson plans and unit plans designed with Common Core Standards from grades 6-12. Our eighth grade ELA teacher is in the in house coach who works with grades 6-8 ELA General Ed and Special Ed teacher to unpack the Expeditionary Learning curriculum and to align teaching strategies across the grade levels to have teachers use strategies across the middle school so there is seamless transition from year to year. Our PML math coach meets with grades 6-8 math teachers to develop classroom practices that incorporate the strategies necessary for students to master the math thinking necessary to meet the Common Core expectations. They will also migrate the work with PML and a blended learning team with the middle school science department teachers. This year our seventh grade science teacher is moving into a teacher leadership role through Urban Advantage in order to migrate the work with the NextGen standards. High school vertical teams meet to plan and develop units of study that are Common Core aligned as we prepare for the Common Core State testing. Professional learning for administration include Showcase School, APLI Facilitation, Shubert Arts Leadership PD's, Computer Science for All, and Urban Advantage for administration. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 CEP 32  Teachers learn best practices from each other every week during the LTE (Learning Through Experience) portion of their Professional Development. They are able to present on any topic and share instructional strategies that inform the staff. Monthly meetings with Instructional Council (admin and teacher leaders), monthly meetings with School Academic Policy Team to review curriculum, assessment, and policy, weekly meetings with our Showcase Fellows, and informal surveys/exit slips from teachers assessing their PD offerings. This information will be monitored via ongoing assessment of improved practice using Danielson classroom evaluations. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 595,858.00 0 11,200.00 0 3,997,233.00 x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 1-5 1-5 1-5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 2018-19 CEP 33  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. South Bronx Preparatory (07X221), in compliance with the ESSA, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. South Bronx Preparatory will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) [South Bronx Preparatory, 07X221] , in compliance with the ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 37  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 38  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the ESSA requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale Title III services at South Bronx Preparatory are supplemental to the school-day language support and instruction that ELLs receive through CR Part 154. Supplemental instruction will be provided through before- school and after-school specific academic intervention services for ELLs after reviewing state, city and school data on ELL performance at SBP. The instructional programs will service ELL students of all grade levels who score at entering, emerging, and transitioning levels on the NYSESLAT. Services for commanding students will be determined based on their scores on their ELA state exams. This program will help our ELLs and transitional ELLs increase academic performance rates, and help prepare them for college and workplace readiness and success. We believe that academic intervention services for our ELLs beyond their school day are essential to ensure academic gains. Therefore, supplemental special education and targeted literacy services must be an integral component of this program. Our goal in the after-school Title III targeted academic intervention is to increase the number of ELLs and transitional ELLs on track to earn Regents diplomas and score 3 and 4 on city and state exams. All services will be completely accessible to students with IEPs. Subgroups To determine which ELLs will participate in the supplemental program we have focused on their language development using data provided by the state. Students in need of additional support who have not been considered yet for the program (at expanding level) will be identified early on the new school year on the basis of diagnostic test data and teacher observations at weekly team cluster meetings. These students are targeted for additional support in the Title III supplemental instructional programs mentioned above which are designed to meet their linguistic and academic needs. At the SBP middle school level, there are six 6th-grade ELL students (two emerging, and four transitioning); five 7th grade ELL students (two entering, three transitioning); and two 8th grade ELL students (one entering, one transitioning). At the high-school level, there are two 9th-grade ELL students (one entering, one transitioning); and two 12th-grade ELL (one entering, one transitioning) for a total of 20 students. In addition our former ELL's from all grades may participate for up to two years after exiting ELL status. Schedule, duration, teachers, language, program and materials The program will run from September 24th, 2018 through May 24th, 2019. The morning supplementary sessions will be offered on Monday, Tuesday and Thursday from 7:15-8:00AM. The afternoon sessions will be offered Tuesdays from 3:00-5:00PM and Thursdays from 3:00-5:00PM The morning and afternoon sessions will focus on assisting our ELL student in their learning and enhancement of first and second languages. We will work with improving their reading and writing skills which will help them with language development as well as with content 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information development. During the sessions students will work with essential components of literacy development. Depending on the language level that each student possesses, activities will focus on oral language, phonological awareness, phonemic awareness, word study, phonics, word identification, composition, comprehension, vocabulary, and fluency (these components are listed in order of development from entering to commanding). The components will be developed using graphic organizers, think-pair-share activities, jigsaws, note-taking and study skills, reading short stories, practicing through discussion, creative writing, among others. As students move from entering to commanding levels of English language acquisition, the materials will become more challenging while remaining cognitively appropriate. Long term ELLs will also be targeted during these after-school sessions. Currently we have 20 long term ELLs who will be encouraged to attend this program. The accommodations will be made by the ENL teacher based on their IEPs (12 of our long term ELLs have IEPs). To improve the ELLs reading skills we will use Achieve 3000 (at no cost to Title III) and RazKids ($260 a year) the use of each type of software will depend on the ELLs language development stage. In addition, students will receive copies of Time for Kids (subscription pending), which will be used as a resource for students to take home and read with their parents. Teachers will plan lessons around pre-reading activities, assess comprehension during reading, and present students with summarizing and reflecting post-reading activities. All these activities will allow students to prepare for the more rigorous common core requirements that their content classes present. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development Title III professional development program will focus on providing teachers with various instructional strategies for teaching English Language Learners. It will also focus on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS performance and learning Standards and achieve higher scores on all city and state assessments. Teachers and teacher trainers participating in the professional development workshops will be paid in at per session rate. The ESL teachers at SBP will attend sessions provided by the Bronx BFSC during the summer. At SBP, the ESL teachers help link staff to Department of Education Office of ELL professional development opportunities as well as city-level professional development opportunities through the network and outside providers. The ESL teachers who provide services at the school are fully certified and hold MA degrees in TESOL and their services are at no cost to Title III. Future workshops are in the planning stages. 2018-19 CEP 44  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale The parental engagement activities address ways to higher academic achievement for ELLs and are additional to mandated ELL activities for parents. We will host a Cultural Exchange Night, which is a school-wide event that includes music, food and customs from some of the countries represented in our school. In addition, we will host a museum trip with the ARTS program to involve students and their parents in new and engaging conversations. Schedule and Duration The ESL teachers and the Parent Coordinator, Taneesha Crawford will plan and conduct ELL parent engagement activities twice annually that will last approximately 60 minutes each time. Title III funded supplemental services will also include parent involvement during the last 45 minutes of the after-school sessions (all the sessions are at no cost to Title III, only snacks will be considered at additional cost and this will depend on the number of parents that are present). The ENL teachers will participate when each grade team has the parental involvement day. Topics to be covered Parent Rights Community Programs/Services (e.g. Title III Supplemental Programming) School Operations School/Teacher Expectations City and State Examinations ELL Student Academic Progress Reports College Readiness and Financial Aid Name of Providers The ESL teachers at SBP are Richard Painter and Judy Chieu. The Parent Coordinator at our school is Taneesha Crawford, and the Arts teacher is Virginia Jose. How Parents will be Notified of these Activities We notify ELL parents of these activities by making phone calls to homes, informing ELL students, mailing letters home, and making announcements on the school's website. 2018-19 CEP 45 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name South Bronx Preparatory Borough Bronx School Number 221 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Ellen R. Flanagan Coach Stephan Hasson ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Richard Painter Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Mandel Teacher/Subject Area Judy Chiu Related-Service Provider Laura Fontaine Superintendent Shane West Assistant Principal Binta Hinson Coach Mallory Marra School Counselor Scott Galassi Parent Nell Perez Parent Coordinator Taneesha Crawford Field Support Center Staff Member Taneesha Crawford Other (Name and Title) Carron Staple - Superintendent C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 662 2018-19 CEP 47 Total number of ELLs 50 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.55%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools used at South Bronx Preparatory to determine the early literacy skills of our ELLS are: a Baseline Assessment, Expeditionary Learning Curricula data, Time on Task Assessments, and Achieve 3000. The Baseline Assessment is used in order to determine the starting point of all students regarding their English language proficiency. It is particularly helpful in determining the literacy skills of ELLs. This assessment provides insight on the student's reading level (approximations), as well as how well they are able to express themselves in written form. These assessments are valuable for most of our ELL population. However, for this school year we have three students who have been identified as entering or emerging. For these students the Baseline Assessment and Time on Task Assessments are not a reliable indicator of their abilities as the texts presented are considerably above their levels of comprehension. For this special population we rely on daily class work and the data that it produces to determine their progress. Throughout the school year we use the assessment tools embedded in the Common Core State Standards aligned with 2018-19 CEP 48  Expeditionary Learning Curricula. These assessments provide ongoing data on the student's reading and writing levels, focusing on reading comprehension. In addition, students take Time on Task Assessments, which resemble the NYSELAT state test, allowing teachers to monitor progress and guide instruction based on the scores that students obtain. For example, during the last academic school year, to determine students' reading and writing levels. This is done three times per year - once at the start of the school year, once midyear, and one in June at the end of the school year. This data is collected and analyzed regularly by grade teams, subject area teams, ESL teachers and administrators. In the classroom, the data is used to group students for small group instruction and to plan for individual conferences and pull-out lessons, if necessary. Additionally, middle students use Achieve 3000 reading assessment level tests at the start of their program and periodically after ever 40 activity sessions. Results are used to determine reading levels, differentiated tests for student use, and to identify necessary teacher-led interventions. All of the 6th grade ELL students receive home computers through partnership with Power My Learning which helps ensure equity in technology and instructional resources. Middle school students are now using various computer software, where the teacher can conference with the student as well as set individual reading goals and keep records of improvement. The ELL teachers conference with the content teachers regularly to change instructional modifications if necessary. ELA teachers use both formal and informal classroom assessments, formative and summative assessments to identify modalities where ELL need additional support and growth. Assessments are offered in students' native language when appropriate, but because many of our school ELLs, while not proficient as identified by NYSESLAT scores, are dominant in English, most literacy development assessments are administered in English. For our entering and emerging students classroom assessments are modified to ensure comprehension. The assessment analysis helps drive our school's instructional plan and the continued examination of ELL student performance shows the school's commitment to the success of ELL students. The ESL teachers have joined the SBP Inquiry Team 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? There are deadlines throughout the year to administer assessments. Teachers also keep running records to document progress. Results are discussed at weekly faculty meetings. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We administer all citywide baseline tests at the beginning of the year, including the ELL periodic assessments. We discuss the results and the results of all teacher made tests to ensure ELL students are progressing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The results of summative assessments are discussed at faculty, grade team and vertical team meetings as needed. Due to the nature of summative assessments, South Bronx Preparatory uses this data to evaluate the effectiveness of our programs and curriculum, as well as a platform to improve our goals and/or place students in specific programs. During our meetings we look at the following: Based on the data we determine if concepts or skills need to be re-taught whole class or if they should be targeted. In addition, we discuss implications for interventions, if they are short term of if they will remain in place for the rest of the school year. Depending on the data we work with the following interventions both at middle and high school level: Tier 1 interventions: Tier 2 interventions: Tier 3 interventions: Additionally we review if certain components of the unit taught need to be re-taught, or if they can be incorporated as additional practice during the school year. 2018-19 CEP 49  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] This does not apply as SBP is a 6-12 school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. All of the test results are used for ESL placement and additional services such as after school programs and in class interventions. We examine the report cards six times per year to insure that the students are making satisfactory academic progress. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Grade team meetings occur once per week when the data is distributed. We also discuss this data at faculty meetings at least twice per month. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs are placed in co-taught classes based on their grade level. This grouping places ELLs of heterogeneous proficiencies together. As per CR Part 154.2 students receive Integrated English as a New Language (Integrated ENL). Students in middle and high school receive support mainly in English language arts as part of the core content areas. However, additional assistance is provided on case-by-case scenarios for science or social studies. In this Integrated ENL setting, instruction is provided by one certified ESOL teacher and a content-area certified teacher, who collaborate to plan and deliver instruction and assessments through a co-teaching model. In addition to the Integrated ENL setting, we also provide Stand-alone ENL instruction. During these units of study students receive instruction in order to acquire the English language needed for success in core content courses. These stand-alone units of study are guided towards the entering and emerging students as additional support for their academic and social success. In middle school, Entering and Emerging (3) students receive a total of 360 ENL minutes from which 90 minutes are standalone ENL during their ELA class period. Transitioning and Expanding (27) students receive 180 minutes of integrated services in either ENL/ELA or other content areas. Proficient (22) students receive 90 minutes of integrated services in either ENL/ELA or other content areas. In high school, we currently do not have Entering and Emerging students. Transitioning and Expanding (20) students receive 180 minutes of integrated services in either ENL/ELA or other content areas. Proficient (17) students receive 90 minutes of integrated services in either ENL/ELA or other content areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. SBP does not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. SBP does not have a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 50  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The organization of the staff at SBP ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in our ESL model. The ESL teachers support ELLs in the push-in ICT classes. High school students taking Spanish classes whose Spanish literacy level exceeds the content of their assigned beginning high school Spanish class receive differentiated and individualized instruction in English facilitated by the ESL teacher and the Spanish teacher and are supported by peer tutors working to receive school-based community service credits. According to our ESL program model and in compliance with CR Part 154, middle school entering and emerging students receive 360 explicit ENL instructional minutes per week, in a combination of stand alone in integrated instruction provided by licensed ESL teachers in ELA and other content area classes; middle school transitioning and expanding ELLs receive 180 explicitly ENL instructional minutes per week provided by the licensed ESL teachers in ELA and other content area classes. Also, students are grouped within the grade section, in which the licensed ESL teacher pushes into and co-teaches. High school entering ELLs receive 540 explicit ESL instructional minutes per week, in a combination of stand alone ENL and integrated ENL. Emerging ELLs receive 360 explicit ENL instructional minutes per week, in a combination of stand alone and integrated instruction provided by the licensed ESL teacher within their ELA and content-area classes. High school transitioning and expanding ELLs receive 180 explicit ESL instructional minutes per week provided by the licensed ESL teacher within their English and content-area classes. Commanding students in both Middle and High school programming receive 90 ENL minutes. All ELLs school-wide are offered native language support through the use of multi-cultural and libraries in the classroom, multi-cultural events school-wide (e.g. multicultural potluck dinner, breakfasts, Spanish cultural events, school-wide diversity and cultural heritage programming and Wednesday workshops. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area information in our ESL model is delivered through a workshop model, allowing for maximum intentional use of grouping through the use of data from formative and summative assessments. Using the workshop model also allows differentiated instruction in the form of stations where information of varying complexity is presented to classes of heterogeneous English proficiency levels. The ESL teacher works with content area teachers to encourage, model and give feedback on the use of differentiated instruction, designing curriculum to increase student engagement, and use of authentic assessments. The materials used in class are mainly determined by the curriculum that the school uses: Engage NY. This curriculum provides teachers with guiding materials, supporting graphs, etc. Although the materials are useful, the ESL teacher and content area teacher work together to modify the charts and organizers provided. These modifications include changing the language to make it clearer, adding extra scaffolding, providing different instructions, addiing vocabulary, images, amongst others. Native language support inside a classroom depends on the students in the class. Groups that have more entering and emerging students benefit more from direct translations. However, some students require the use of additional resources like images in order to decrease the language barriers. Overall, the ESL objectives match teachers with appropriate professional development opportunities to help them develop their literacy instruction skills within the ESL framework. This collaboration takes place through grade level and vertical team meetings, school-based profession development, professional development offered through the Office of English Language Learners, co-planning periods, inter visitations, and invitations to work on all school inquiry teams. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Native languages are evaluated by conducting the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) at students' initial entries and updated periodically at the request of the Department of Education. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 51  We differentiate instruction for all subgroups in the following ways: (a) The instructional plan for Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) includes the ESL teacher providing education for staff working with SIFE ELLs on the nature and effects of each SIFE student's academic history. Where applicable, the ESL teacher collaborates with the Pupil Personnel Team to collect additional social and family data necessary to inform instruction. The ESL teacher includes SIFE students in ELL Inquiry Team research and monitors SIFE students' progress in ELA and Math as indicators of progress toward promotion and/or possible academic interventions. SIFE students are encouraged to attend after school Title III programs in ESL, Science and Math. SIFE students with IEPs additionally work with a resource teacher to supplement literacy instruction using grade-level appropriate resources (i.e. Achieve 3000, RazKids, etc). (b) ELLs who have been in U.S. schools for less than three years are partnered in class with higher-level English proficiency ELLs to serve as liaisons and provide graduated help with translation, when necessary. The ESL teacher works with high level ELLs who help newcomer ELLS to determine and teach collaborative skills that will help both the newcomer and the higher level ELL (i.e. reciprocal teaching, note-taking, close reading, active listening) and collaborates with content area teachers in order to identify a range of students in each class who would benefit from helping a newcomer in the adaptation phase. Newcomers are strongly encouraged to attend after-school Title III programming in ESL, math and science, taught by both the ESL teacher and the content area teachers. (c) ELLs who have been in U.S. schools between four and six years and are beginner-level are partnered in class with higher-level ELLs who help beginner level ELLs to determine and teach collaborative skills that will help both the beginner level ELL and the higher level ELL (i.e. reciprocal teaching, close reading, note-taking, active listening) and collaborates with content are teachers in order to identify a range of students in each class who would benefit from helping a newcomer in the adaptation phase. ELLS with four to six years of experience in U.S. schools are strongly suggested to attend the after-school Title III programming in ESL and content area classes. (d) ELLS who have been in U.S. schools more than six years and classified as LTELLs level are partnered in class with former ELLs to serve as liaisons and provide graduated help with translation as necessary. The ESL teachers work with former ELLs who help LTELLs to determine and teach collaborative skills that will help both the LTELLs and the former ELLs (i.e. reciprocal teaching, note taking, close reading, active listening. The ESL teacher collaborates with content area teachers in order to identify a range of student in each class who would benefit from helping an LTELL in second lanague acquisition phase. LTELLs at entering, emerging or transitional levels of proficiency are also included in a pull-out ESL class, taught by the ESL teacher, designed to address challenges to students' literacy skills. The class specifically prepares students to succeed on the NYSESLAT through test knowledge and the use of differentiated texts for whole-class reading and writing, modeled on the NYSESLAT writing section. LTELLs are strongly urged to attend the after-school Title III programming in ESL, and content area classes. (e) Former ELLs reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT in the next two years are entitled to testing accommodations like those of the current ELLs (ie. separate locations, extended time, use of bilingual glossaries, third reading of the listening portion on the ELA Regents). In addition, former ELLs in the following two years receive continued transitional support which includes 90 minutes of mandated service per week during the school day as well as after school tutoring and access to all cultural and education programs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs identified as having special needs receive individualized literacy instruction from a resource teacher to supplement ELA based literacy instruction using grade level appropriate resources (i.e. Achieve 3000, RazKids, Light Sail, etc.). These technological resources support ELLs by improving their reading and writing skills. Depending on the level of each student, they will use a different program. For entering and emerging students we use RazKids, while more advanced students use Achieve 3000, which differentiates their readings based on a baseline assessment. The ESL teacher also works with special education teachers continuously to help identify and create language goals to include in students' IEP that would help students and teachers monitor and improve ELL-SWDs language, as well as content, skills. Teachers of ELL-SWDs work together to increase student engagement and comprehension to include listening, speaking, reading and writing. The teachers allow students extended wait or processing time, employ technology in the classroom, create small-group instruction, modify written texts, and give individualized instruction. ELLs identified as having special needs are strongly recommended to attend the twice weekly after-school Title III program in ESL and content areas. The school ensures that ELL-SWDs whose IEP mandates ESL instruction receive the appropriate program by identifying the 2018-19 CEP 52  students at the beginning of the school year. A report is created by the school's Assistant Principal, which is reviewed by the ESL teachers using SESIS. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ESL instructional material are largely teacher-created, adapted from Engage New York, the Common Core Learning standards aligned literacy curriculum based on expeditionary learning. In collaboration with content area teachers, texts and textbooks from ELA, math, science and social studies are also used in ESL classes. Grade level appropriate materials are chosen for their reading accessibility and then modified for the individual student's reading level. Student schedules are built around the needs of the students. Additionally, ENL teachers have flexibility in scheduling to ensure all the students are properly served. The criteria used to place students in ICT classes include: Multiple assessments conducted by teachers in the SCHOOL BASED SUPPORT TEAM, anecdotal notes from teachers, counselors, referrals, PUPIL PERSONNEL SERVICES, and recommendations by school, psychologists during initial, annual or revaluation reviews. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs for ELLS in ELA and other content areas are delivered across content area classes along with the ESL teacher in an ICT setting. Interventions are targeted through the use of data collected during departmental meetings and in co-planning meetings with the ESL teachers and the ELL Inquiry Team. The school-wide use of Expeditionary Learning curriculum, which is CCLS-aligned, draws on best practices in ESL by incorporating teacher modeling, and the use of technology both to demonstrate aspects of the writing process, to engage students in the writing process, to increase the amount of writing that students produce, and to build on students' functionality in computers to raise the level of incorporated revising and editing strategies. ELLs who did not make Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in the previous academic year in ELA according to Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives (AMAOs) are chosen for a targeted list of students to include in the ELL Inquiry Team study. ELA teachers, whose ELL have not made AYP, work collaboratively with the ESL teacher in order to identify, assess, and modify interventions to help these ELLS make up lost progress and move to the next level in ELA based on city and state tests, including NYSESLAT levels. In addition to the existing ELA classes, ELLs in 6 th grade with IEPs and all ELLs in 7 th and 8 th grades use Achieve 3000 for two to five periods (116-290 minutes) a week with a special education teacher who has gone through Quality Teaching of English Language (QTEL) and Achieve 3000 training; the special education teacher team teaches with the ESL teacher in order to systematically assess, differentiate, and increase the student reading and writing levels. In analyzing the data about the ESL program, we determined that our students needed more contact hours with Achieve 3000 in order to make the expected 1.5 grade level gains in reading that Achieve 3000 can help our students. The Achieve 3000 proposed in the last Language Allocation Policy has been implemented as planned. Targeted interventions in math are discussed and planned at departmental meetings, co-planning meetings, vertical team and grade team meetings. Academic interventions in math are implemented in math classes and in targeted after-school interventions conducted during Title III programming. ELLs who have not made AYP in math and ELLs who have not achieved proficiency on the city and state exams are targeted to attend the after-school math instruction with a licensed math teacher. Academic interventions for ELLs in ELA are conducted in English and Spanish, if necessary. Targeted interventions in science and social studies are planned at departmental meetings and in vertical and grade team meetings. Strategies are also discussed and planned at ELL Inquiry Team meetings based on student work. Academic interventions in science and social studies are implemented in science and social studies classes are implemented based on discussions and data review in vertical and grade team meetings. ELLs who have not made AYP in science and social studies and ELLs who have not achieved proficiency on city and state exams are targeted to attend after-school science and social studies programming with a teacher who is licensed in the content area. Academic interventions for ELLs in ELA are conducted in English and in Spanish, if necessary. In implementing targeted intervention approaches with ELLs regarding the use of native language we first determine a student's knowledge and skills in their first language. As it has been mentioned, in some cases there is use of direct translation, and allowing the student to respond using their native language. However, there are subgroups of students whose literacy 2018-19 CEP 53  knowledge and skills in their first language are low. Therefore, using native language intervention programs is not always optimal. In order to identify the students in this subgroup we conduct mostly informal conversations with the students. In addition, this group of ELLs is screened on the same early reading indicators as native English language speakers, including phonological awareness, letter knowledge, and word and text reading. We use translation services when necessary, and we refer back to the student's education history. Data collected in this way allows us to identify if there is a need to teach basic language structures or if the student is in need of additional services. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We expanded the use of Achieve 3000 and the use of Power My Learning. We will schedule ongoing co-planning periods between content area teacher and the ESL teachers, increase the number of teachers familiar with best practices in ESL methodologies through professional development and other programs offered by the Office of English Language Learners. These improvements have been set in motion as a response to the results that students obtained on the NYSESLAT and the State Exams. Students scored between a 1 and a 2 on their state exams and showed that their reading skills are not to the par of the rest of their peers. This prompted the expanded use of Achieve 3000 and Power My Learning as tools to increment student reading time, further developing this skill. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? SBP has never had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs as they are included in all school-wide programs, grade- and class-level programs. In addition to the ESL, science and math Title III Programming, middle school LTELLs are included in the grant-funded after-school program that we share with MS 223 in the same building. This 20-week program provides specific reading and writing support through Achieve 3000, math support through Power My Learning and classroom math interventions, NYSESLAT preparation, college planning, family involvement and arts programming. Additionally, ELLs and former ELLs are encouraged to participate in the full range of after-school programming at our school including another one run by Bronx Works, an outside community based organization. The after-school program run by Bronx Works invites all students to participate with them on their afternoon activities, which offer academic help, as well as activites that foster social development. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials to support ELLs are Achieve 3000, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond, expeditionary learning curriculum supplied by the Department of Education, along with the modifications that go along with that curriculum. For ELL-SWDs we use Raz Kids to determine lower reading levels and improve them. Once students have completed these levels and are ready for more advanced readings, students move to Light Sail. Both of these online reading programs allow teachers to track student improvement while providing them with appropriate books at their reading level. The use of two different programs is necessary due to their target audiences. All core content area materials are provided by Engage NY, which is then modified by teachers in order to make the content more accessible. However, ELL students read the same books that non-ELLs are reading and being exposed to. In order to be able to follow along, ELL students are provided with online links to access audiobooks which they can play back at home to practice their reading. During after-school, entering and emerging students work with Phonics Blitz, to improve their English language skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in our ESL program through ESL cultural field trips, native language support through multicultural and Spanish libraries in classrooms, and multicultural events school-wide. High school ELLs reaching proficiency take Spanish language classes and are offered Spanish Advanced Placement classes where appropriate. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 54  SBP uses programs that assign student lexile levels which help determine the appropriate reading material to increase literacy. We also use American Reading Program, which lists appropriate books for students at their reading level based on the assessment before reading begins. In high school, we use the baseline assessments provided by the Department of Education in order to choose material suitable for student language and content area improvement. For ELL-SWDs we use Raz Kids to determine lower reading levels and improve them. Once students have completed these levels and are ready for more advanced readings, students move to more advanced reading. Both of these online reading programs allow teachers to track student improvement while providing them with appropriate books at their reading level. The use of two different programs is necessary due to their target audiences. Raz Kids provides books that begin at the lowest lexile levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share the building with another school and the ESL departments are in constant communication to share teaching strategies and discuss compliance and testing issues. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs take part in all school-and grade-wide summer programming before the beginning of the school year, including 6th grade Welcome Program (a week-long introduction to high school academic expectations) and 9th Grade Club Getaway, an overnight outdoor education class trip. Throughout the school year, as new ELLs enroll into our school, we host individualized orientation for both the ELLs and their parents. This helps them gradually become acclimated in the new social and academic setting. These orientations are held by an ELL specialist (either Mr. Painter or Ms. Gross), along with the help of the administrative office staff and the schools' guidance counselor Mr. Scott Galassi. The orientations include information on academic and social activities, uniform policies, a guided tour of the classrooms in order to meet the teachers, etc. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish language electives are offered at SBP. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? This does not apply as SBP does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers of ELLs are provided with opportunities to learn and build capacity and effectiveness in using best ESL teaching practices. These opportunities include school level professional development in the form of grade team meetings, departmental meetings, co-planning periods with the ESL teacher, participation in the ELL Inquiry Team and training in using Achieve 3000. The ESL teacher works with individual content area teachers to identify areas of support to improve effectiveness of content area teachers’ instructional strategies for use with ELLs. The ESL teacher also identifies teachers utilizing best ESL practices and coordinates inter-visitations for teachers to watch effective ESL strategies in use in classroom instruction. Teachers of ELLs are 2018-19 CEP 55  provided with opportunities to utilize network level professional development conducted by the school's Network, that is, periodic ESL meetings and topic specific workshops, such as “Individual Educational Programs and English Language Learners, Part 154." Additionally, all teachers of ELLs are provided with opportunities to participate in city level ESL professional development offered by the New York City Department of Education’s Office of English Language Learners. Following is the scheduled professional learning sessions. Each session meets on Wednesdays from 1:30 p.m. to 3:10 p.m. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff members who work with ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school and from middle school to high school are supported with the help of the guidance staff, the ESL teacher and the Parent Coordinator. Staff are assisted to understand ESL testing guidelines and accommodations, ELL academic language and social language needs, the use of effective strategies in involving families of ELLs to work toward ELL academic success, ESL classroom strategies to build on ELL background content knowledge, connecting ELLs’ previous experience with expected grade-level content and skill gains, and specific demographic and promotion rates as useful in determining the most effective methods of supporting ELLs. All ELLs partake in the school- and grade wide summer programming before the beginning of each school year, including 6th Grade Welcome Program (a week-long introduction to school culture and academic expectations), 9th Grade Orientation (one to two days of introduction to high school academic expectations) and the 9th Grade Club Getaway overnight outdoor education class trip. Staff members working with ELLs are encouraged to attend orientation to build a community between ELLs and other staff working with ELLs. As per CR Part 154.2, ESL training for all staff is conducted in-house through the weekly Wednesday professional development (1:30 pm-3:10pm). Thus, we meet the hours required by the CR Part 154.2 mandate for all teachers. We use attendance sheets as record keeping of all staff members receiving such training. These records are maintained in the ESL teacher's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Individual meetings with the parents of ELLs are scheduled throughout the year in order to discuss goals, progress and language development. An initial meeting is held at the beginning of the year to discuss the program in general. Individual meetings are then scheduled based on need. These meetings may occur more than once depending on the student and the needs of the parents. Using our school’s translation and interpretation team, translation and interpretation services in Spanish, French, Mandarin, Cantonese, and Arabic are readily available to parents of ELLs. In the case, in which a language is not spoken by any of the team’s committee members, we reach out to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for help. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs work with our school’s Parent Coordinator, Taneesha Crawford, in periodic meetings with the general parent population and also in a specialized meeting for ELL parents in the fall. In order to evaluate the needs of ELL parents, parent discussion groups during the parent meetings and individual meetings during parent Teacher Conferences are held. Ms. Crawford supports parents in accessing computers and provides instruction in resume writing, job searches, and accessing community programs and benefits for families in response to parents’ requests. She also helps coordinate the school’s participation in Power My Learning, which provides the family of each 6th grade student with a home computer and reduced rate internet access, allowing parents to become involved more easily in accessing their children’s educational data through Jupiter Grades and partake in the parental literacy component of Achieve 3000 in addition to helping parents and children use 2018-19 CEP 56  internet-based educational software to increase student academic skills. Using our school’s translation and interpretation team, translation and interpretation services in Spanish, French, Mandarin, Cantonese, and Arabic are readily available to parents of ELLs. In the case in which a language is not spoken by any of the team’s committee members, we reach out to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for help. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ellen Reddon Flanagan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: South Bronx Preparatory School DBN: 7X221 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Ellen Flanagan Title Principal Binta Hinson Assistant Principal Taneesha Crawford Parent Coordinator Richard Painter ENL/Bilingual Teacher Nell Perez Parent Jennifer Mandel Teacher/Subject Area Maria Gross Teacher/Subject Area Mallory Marra Stephan Hasson Coach Coach Scott Galassi School Counselor Carron Staple Florentino Rosa Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Jennifer Albano Other Special Education Laura Fontaine Shane West Other Related Service Provider Other Related Service Provider Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 01/30/2018 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: #07X22 School Name: South Bronx Preparatory Superintendent: CarronStaple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Indhira Melara Business Manager No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We extrapolate data from the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) in terms of preferred written and oral language notifications of parents. In addition, we also use different data sources from ATS that would capture the written translation and oral interpretation needs of the ELL families. The predominant home language for our ELL population is Spanish, with 44 ELL families speaking Spanish at home. We also have one Wolof-speaking ELL family. Within the school staff, we have the capacity to translate and interpret both written and oral forms of communication in Spanish, French and Arabic. For the ELLs whose home languages is low-incident languages, we will utilize translation services from the Department of Education Office of Translation and Interpretation Services. Staff Member: Language Translation and Interpretation Services 2018-19 CEP 60  Marlene Sanchez - Spanish, written and oral Chaouiki Hadjahmed - French, Arabic, written and oral For the languages that parents speak we refer to their preferred language selection, and keep an updated form on Google Documents. This form can be accessed by the Principal and the ENL teachers. For languages that are not covered by the DOE interpretation services, we will reach out to locate a family member who may be able to translate. If this is not successful, we will contact the NYC DOE Translation & Interpretation Unit. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ENGLISH SPANISH ARABIC SONINKE 543 372 12 11 56.33 38.59 1.24 1.14 534 381 12 9 55.39 39.52 1.24 0.93 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Newsletters September, monthly Parent-teacher conference announcements September, November, March, April After-school program information September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We have Spanish translating services on site and we will provide other services as necessary. We have Spanish translating services on site and we will provide other services as necessary. We have Spanish translating services on site and we will provide other services as necessary. 2018-19 CEP 61  Testing dates and related information September We have Spanish translating services on site and we will provide other services as necessary. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open School Night September 26,2018 Parent teacher conferences November 19, 2018 Parent teacher conferences March 22-23, 2019 Parent night May 9, 2019 interpretation service(s)? We have Spanish translating services on site and we will provide other services as necessary. We have Spanish translating services on site and we will provide other services as necessary. We have Spanish translating services on site and we will provide other services as necessary. We have Spanish translating services on site and we will provide other services as necessary. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In case of a school emergency we will use the school messenger system. If needed parents of ELLs will be contacted directly via Jupiter Grades, or by phone. Teachers have been instructed in how to use the DOE Translation and Interpretation cards and services. If parents comment that they need Jupiter grade in a language not covered by the policy, we will consult DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. ESL professionals have regular presentations in the Wednesday professional development sessions to insure that all staff know the procedure with dealing with parents who do not speak English. All teachers have the cards that parents can point to with the number to find an interpreter. Posters are in the main office and all personnel know the procedure for contacting interpreting services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 62  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) South Bronx Preparatory school community ensures that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. As such, the majority of our ELL parents who need translation and interpretation services choose to rely on an adult friend/companion or relative for translation and interpretation services. We allow family members or students over the age of 18 to serve as interpreters for school staff and parents during any formal or informal meeting where student achievement and/or student conduct are discussed. In addition, our Parent Coordinator ensures that there are prominent signage (e.g. interpretation notice signs) that are posted in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance to the school covering major languages and indicating the availability of translation and interpretation services. Our school's Assistant Principals, Binta Hinson and Victoria Orsi, provide safety plan procedures of the school to parents of ELLs through meetings with parents, using the translation and interpretation services inside or outside of our school, if needed. In order to fulfill the parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, as per Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 we translate documents that contain critical information regarding student's education in the needed languages. If we are unable to translate a document in-school we use the available translation and interpretation parents. In addition we collect data regarding the primary lanuguage spoken by the parents of each child and keep this information in the ESL office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services, South Bronx Preparatory parents complete a parent survey which the school uses to determine necessary changes or further implementations on our available services. 2018-19 CEP 63 
