2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X225 School Name: THEATRE ARTS PRODUCTION COMPANY SCHOOL Principal: RON LINK 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information THEATRE ARTS PRODUCTION COMPANY 321000010225 6-12 School Number (DBN): 10X225 2225 WEBSTER AVENUE BRONX NY 10458 7185840832 Phone Number: 7185845102 Fax: rlink2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Ron Link RON LINK Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): ALEXANDRIA TOM DENISE FIGUEROA STEVEN GOLDMAN EBONNIE ROBINSON KAYLA SMITH, VICTORIA RAMSAHOYE Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: JASIMEN WASHINGTON District Information Geographical District: 10 CARRONSTAPLE Superintendent: 1 FORDHAM PLAZA BRONX NY 10458 Superintendent’s Office Address: cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7187415852 Phone Number: (718) 741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: NANCY SAFFER Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-608-0230 Phone Number: (718) 828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) RON LINK ALEXANDRIA TOM DENISE FIGUEROA N/A EBONNIE ROBINSON VICTORIA RAMSAHOYE KAYLA SMITH *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) JASIMENWASHINGTON CBO Representative STEVE GOLDMAN NICOLE STUART ALEX JANCESKI Member/STAFF/TEACHER Member/STAFF/TEACHER Member/STAFF/TEACHER/CHAIR 2018-19 CEP 5  Name SWAROSWATTEE (SALLY) RAMSAHOYE BRIAN GUNNING VERONICA RODRIGUEZ LEMAIRE Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At TAPCo we care for ourselves and each other. We support artistic self-expression and sustainability-oriented collaboration in a demanding, high-tech arts and academic environment. Students major in one of two areas- either in an arts studio or a technical/digital area. All TAPCo students learn the collaborative and self-management skills required for success in the 21st century world of the arts enabling them to continually evolve and excel in college, career, and life. 2018-19 CEP 9  Our students achieve academic, personal, and social success through habits of preparedness, perseverance, and kindness . We foster high achievement through the educational possibilities rooted in the interplay of academics and the arts . As TAPCo community members, we: support our school Community members just as they support us; focus on our Academic and Artistic work; take Responsibility for our choices and actions through respect for others, our environment, and ourselves, and; celebrate and communicate our community’s accomplishments of Excellence. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Personalization is central to all of our efforts. After intensive school-wide collaborative work for the past two years, we are now at the point where all of our High School students choose one of five “studios” or tracks of study culminating in the opportunity to qualify for an Advanced Regents Diploma with Certifications in the Arts. DANCE. Students develop their creativity, strength, alignment and teaching skills as they learn Modern Dance, Ballet, Composition Technology and Principles of Dance. Pedagogy is blended to help students develop their own unique voice as creators with competitive skills to succeed in the real world. THEATRE. Students learn acting technique, scene study, voice and diction, movement, singing, theatre history, audition preparation, digital (photo & video) resume building, script analysis, directing, lighting design, and stagecraft in addition to exploring performance and acting techniques for full stage classical, modern, and musical theatre productions as well as smaller studio settings. VISUAL ARTS . Images (Drawing, Painting, Digital Design). Students develop their artistic skills as they progress through classroom assignments such as still life drawing, perspective drawing, portraiture, figure drawing, and abstract compositions using a variety of drawing, painting, and digital design media. MUSIC. Instrumental. Small group instruction in traditional Band Instruments; Jazz Band; Latin Band, Music Theory, Music History, Improvisation, Sight Singing and Piano; On or offsite private lessons by audition. Choral. General Choir, Show Choir, Jazz Choir, and Women’s Choir; Music Theory, Music History, Improvisation, Sight Singing and Piano; On or off-site private lessons by audition. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We successfully serve our Special Education and English Language Learner students directly through our strong Arts program. Our rehearsal process is adapted to meet the needs of the ensemble including those students with severe dyslexia, social-emotional impairments, cognitive functioning below grade level, and those actively learning the English language. Included in our Special Education population we have a small group of Self-Contained students, as well as Special Education students that are accommodated in an ICT or SETSS setting. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We had the greatest growth in the element of Collaborative Teachers. We will be focusing on Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership, and Strong Family-Community Ties for the 2018-19 school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X225 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 608 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 22 22 6 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 71 60 14 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 78.6% % Reduced Lunch 7.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 69.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.56 4% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 75% 64% 72.9% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 147 135 8 85.2% 0.8% 23.2% 26.5% 1.3% 1.5% 4 18% 6.6 21.1% 54% 79% 75% 83.9% 9% N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A needs review of our school’s NYS Middle School/High School test data combined with findings from our PPO visit identified needed improvement in our teacher and school-wide practices to ensure that rigorous academic tasks and teaching practices offer multiple entry points, engaged students at all levels with demonstrable thinking manifest in challenging writing tasks with higher-order questioning and discussions about those tasks with teachers making deliberate in-class formative assessments with clear and actionable feedback to increase student learning outcomes. In addition, we conducted a Needs Assessment for and with the support of the Office of Arts and Special Projects.  Middle School: Part II - Constructed Response on Middle School Exams  Students lack understanding of theme o Lack of student use of text evidence o Argumentative Writing - students confused writing argumentative essays (no counterclaim or confused with what side they support)  High School: Regents Exams - Part II o Low Essay Scores on History Regents Students did not incorporate sufficient details to support their themes   Did not know how to integrate ideas from multiple topics in History together in order to establish a theme For DBQ Essays, students had trouble integrating outside information into their essays to support the context of the documents  High School: Low Extended Response on Math Exams  o Many students did not make any valid attempts to complete Extended Response o o Students are not writing about their process, or making their thinking visible Increase in rigorous reading involved in writing Extended Response Low Essay Scores on CC English Regents   High School o Continued need to improve Blueprint-aligned 10 credit scope and sequence curriculum in Dance, Drama, Visual Studies, Vocal Music and Instrumental Music. o Need for Arts pedagogical development of teachers instructing in the Arts (studio and elective) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 12  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of a continued implementation of Writing Revolution and specific pedagogical strategies utilized to address targeted learning gaps identified through data analysis, by June 2019, there will be an average increase of 10% on combined NYS Regents Exams and a 10% increase on combined NYS MS Exams. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  We will collect baseline data on target populations. o MS: low to mid 2’s on state ELA exams; HS: 55-64 on regents  6th-8th grade ELA exams - low-mid 2’s  9th grade - 10th grade - look at 8th grade ELA scores - low-mid 2’s  High School - 55-64 All subject - students scoring between 55-64 are targeted  We will collect end of year data on target populations. o 6th-8th grade ELA & 6th and 7th grade Math exams - constructed and extended writing pieces. o 9th grade - Aligned Assessment to Hochman o 10th grade - Global Exam - part 2 writing/ Math part 2 o 11th grade - US and/or Common Core ELA regents scores/ Math part 2   o 12th grade - Retakes of ELA/History exams SWD and ELL student subgroups are identified as subgroups above. Students scoring between 65 and 74 on the ELA Regents exam and those scoring between 65 and 69 on all Math Regents will be identified by Guidance and shared at PD with staff. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? MS & HS All Subject Areas With State Exams September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Model Teachers, Instructional Leads,District Public, Leadership Academy Coach, IEP/ESL Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Community Associate, Parent Coordinator, Parents and Students. ● By using a team of model teachers, we will create opportunities to support teachers in implementing rigorous instruction in all classrooms from September 2018 through June 2019. Model teachers will have open classroom in which teachers can observe rigorous instruction across various subject areas. Model teachers will demonstrate how to effectively implement catch and release methods, differentiated instruction and engagement through higher order thinking skills. Following a visit to a model teacher's classroom, teachers are expected to debrief with the model teacher and work to implement strategies observed and learned. Model teachers will also be available to help teachers design and co-plan lesson plans that contain rigorous instruction. Model Teachers and teachers September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Model Teachers 2018-19 CEP 14  By using a consistent team of teacher leads, we will create pockets of weekly meeting times from September 2018 through June 2019 lead by the instructional leads and school leadership to create a protocol for looking at student work (past exams for student re-taking the exam), specifically the item skills analysis as part of individual and teacher team inquiry cycles. All teachers will then identify the three areas /performance indicators/strands where students displayed the weakest performance (as per the Item Skills Analysis). Atlas curriculum maps will be revised to include the three areas /performance indicators/strands through the lens of the CCLS (with specific dates of content being taught).   Lowest 3rd- Lesson plans will be differentiated for bottom third subgroup. Students scoring between 65 and 74 on the ELA Regents exam and those scoring between 65 and 69 on all Math Regents- This subgroup has been scheduled to retake Regents exam in January. If CCR is not met, they will be scheduled to retake exams in June. Guidance will communicate this to students, (which is currently not the case, and why so many students are no shows on exam day). ● Regents Prep will be offered after school for six weeks prior to the start of the Regents testing period. Teachers of Regents Prep after-school and Regents Review (no credit) will utilize item analysis data and scores from each student on their class roster to guide their instruction. Letters will be sent and phone calls will be made home to parents apprising them of their child's status regarding what Regents they are slated to take, prior test scores, and the Regents' Prep schedule. Parents of all students slated to take the Global History Regents will be invited to have a meeting with our Regents Readiness Team (Principal, Assistant Principal, IEP/ENL Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Community Associate, Parent Coordinator, Parents and Students) MS & HS ELA and History Departments September 2018 through June 2019. MS & HS ELA and History Departments Students November 2018 and April 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Model Teachers, Instructional Leads, District Public, IEP/ESL Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Community Associate, Parent Coordinator, Parents and Students. Guidance Counselors, Teachers, and Assistant Principals School Leaders, ELA and History Department, Guidance, Parent Coordinator, Parents, Teachers Parent outreach by our new Parent Coordinator and Parent Association through: Parents  providing communications in languages representative of our school community. Monthly for the 2018-19 school year Principal, AP of Guidance, Guidance Counselor's Office, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, Pupil Accounting Secretary 2018-19 CEP 15   using social media to communicate with parents via our school website www.tapconyc.org and the Remind app to reach parents via phone.  establishing an easy system for teachers to regularly report student achievements via PupilPath.  distributing calendars so parents can record and are notified of upcoming events, assignments, and dates to check with teachers on their children’s progress. via Pupil Path and our school website.  providing training for school personnel on meaningful communication and collaboration with families via workshops after school and on Saturdays.  Use of the REMIND App for students and parents to reach out about opportunities for Regents and State Exam preparation. ● As a host school for Learning Partners and with our Model and Instructional Lead Teachers, we will be sharing best practices and conducting intervisitations at every level of our school to improve teacher writing instruction.   Instructional APs will recommend and implement conducting model lessons, as part of the feedback that is shared with teachers. Instructional APs will regularly attend co-planning, and department meetings to guide the unit mapping for each month of instruction.  Using content specific Hess Rigor Matrix for application in each designated subject area to improve the rigor of tasks and to use as a coaching tool for feedback sessions, co-planning and coaching.  Using WeTeachNYC to provide teachers with resources and strategies that model rigorous tasks and best practices. Specific Strategies  Implementing Hochman Method o Step 1: 10 teachers (focusing on 6th/7th/9th/10th grade) that have never been trained before are attending 3-session training throughout the fall semester o Step 2: During weekly grade team meetings, our peer collaborative teacher, who has advanced training in the Hochman Method, is meeting with teachers to go over best practices, share student work samples, analyze tasks, and provide resources for teachers to use o Step 3: Administration and Peer-Collaborative Teacher will co-plan and visit teachers' classrooms while they implement the strategies Principals, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers, Teachers Summer 2018 and every month of the 2018-19 school year Principals, Assistant Principals, 6 Model Teachers & Instructional Lead Teachers Summer 2018 and every month of the 2018-19 school year Principal, Assistant Principals,4 Model Teachers & Instructional Lead Teachers, SWD Teachers, ENL Teachers, Cabinet, Hochman Writing Method Coaches, A List Coaches Principals, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers, Teachers of ELA, Math, and History, Guidance Counselors 2018-19 CEP 16  and work to help them integrate those strategies into their lessons o Step 4: There are 3 site visits throughout the school year from staff at The Writing Revolution to provide direct feedback to teachers on implementing the Hochman Method in their classrooms o Step 5: Our Peer Collaborative Teacher works throughout the year to collect task samples for submission for detailed feedback to The Writing Revolution staff, and will then turnkey that feedback to the teachers that have submitted those tasks. o Step 6: Throughout the year there are benchmark assessments for The Writing Revolution (BOY/Sept, MOY/Jan. EOY/May) to help assess progress of students and provide data about student writing that is actionable for teachers o Other Writing Strategies  RACE Writing strategy  Unpacking the task. Restating the writing prompt   Writing journal to show progression of writing across all Sentence frames  classrooms using the Hochman method SWD Teachers and ENL Teachers will provide additional before and after school targeted support in the articulated strategies above.  Teachers of ELA and Math that culminate in Regents exams will offer before and after school targeted support to students to retake the ELA and Math Regents exams based on data provided by District Public. Specifically for bottom third in MS and 55-64 in HS.  All Regents bearing courses will be adapted to correspond to AP curriculum and exams  Teachers will be taught how to use and implement an evidence-based instructional methodology to provide expository writing instruction to students. DANCE, THEATRE, VISUAL ARTS, VOCAL MUSIC & INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC, To facilitate/accelerate growth - Continued observations from Principal Link and consultant Typhani Harris Consultant Typhani Harris will* Conduct workshops with teachers to align curriculum with Blueprint & Specific Considerations for the Arts, Commencement exams, and Vision* Arts Teachers (studio and elective) From September to June 2019 Principal, Dr. Harris, Model Teachers Jessica Galimidi and Dayana Delpech 2018-19 CEP 17 Coach teachers on pedagogy using the Evaluators Tool aligning Danielson with the Blueprint for the Arts Teachers will: * Attend all Arts Mondays PD and integrate learning into instruction and curriculum development * Implement strategies suggested by Borough Arts Director and Studio Directors from the Office of Arts of Special Projects from baseline visits in October and November 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Regular meetings from September '18 through June '19 with our Parent Coordinators and Cabinet to ensure sharing of key resources, dates, and supports. Letters home about the new curriculum being written in Dance, Drama, Instrumental & Vocal Music, and Visual Studies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Regular attendance at weekly departmental meetings with all stakeholders including administration and model teachers. 2. Instructional Leads and Model Teachers devise actions plans based on data analysis that are provided to teachers as models of effective instructional intervention. 3. Monthly departmental/faculty meetings, subject area, and grade level meetings will be held on a regularly scheduled basis. 4. Per session will be utilized to pay for professional development and Instructional Lead meetings provided on and off-site after school hours by the DOE, network, consultants, and administration (no per session except for AP). 5. Global History teachers have been prioritized to attend Professional Development provided by DOE on the new Global Curriculum and Regents exam. 6. Professional Development provided by Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Leads, ADVANCE data, Leadership Academy Coach, IEP/ENL Coordinator, and to strengthen student work through considering, analyzing, and improving teacher curriculum, assessments, and classroom instruction with a focus on Questioning and Discussion Techniques. 7. Common rubrics as in: Exemplar High School TAPCo Essay specific to Global History (scaffold by subject & grade); Vocabulary and Glossaries for High School State Test Success (subject & grade). 2018-19 CEP 18  8. Teacher intervisitation schedule to observe best practices with protocols and debriefs with follow up visits. 9. Model Teacher coaching of peers through visitation, intervisitation, and debriefs with follow up visits Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Our teachers, data specialist (District Public), guidance counselors and administrators will conduct analyses of the results of formative assessments at regular intervals throughout the school year as compared to the Regents results to evaluate growth in student learning and effectiveness of teachers adjusting teaching based on data analysis of students actual exams (essays) and item analysis. 2. Principal and Assistant Principals will evaluate meeting notes and goals provided by all team meetings on a weekly basis Principal and Assistant Principals will evaluate meeting notes and goals provided by all team meetings on a weekly basis. 3. Six-week benchmarks, using the Data Driven Classroom (DDC) will reveal percentage of student mastery and individual student mastery of taught Standards-Aligned Skills and Subject Area Content. 4. Midterm exams will be administered in January as a full Regents exam, and results will be analyzed to adjust curriculum for Term 2. 5. Quantitative benchmark data at the end of the 1st marking period in January '19 will manifest at least a 50% improvement in baselines administered in September '18. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Data analysis in Excel and/or DDC, meeting notes, benchmark results & midterms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We examined our Framework for Great Schools Report to arrive at this goal. School practices and conditions (measured by Quality Review and N School Survey) that drive student achievement. Scores are on scale from 1.00 - 4.99. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of the implementation of a comprehensive school-wide advisory program and new student support measures in our Office of Student Support, by June 2019, there will be a 10% decrease in the number of Principal and Superintendent suspensions. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of Advisory Program. MS and HS students TAPCo’s advisory meetings take place every Friday and students were grouped with peers and teachers with special attention to students’ socio-emotional and academic needs and goals. 12:1 student:teacher ratios in all advisory sessions. The 2018-2019 advisory curriculum is based on the College Board’s Advisory Session Guide Lesson Plans for grades 6-12. The 2018-2019 advisory goals align with TAPCo’s main foci: academic rigor, socio-emotional learning, and building a safe and productive school community. In advisory, students receive peer mentoring, academic mentorship through informal and formal conferences, and create their own personal and academic goals for the 2018-2019 school year. In addition, advisory teams will each design and implement their own community-building project in order to build community. Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Start Date 9/5/18-End Date 6/26/18 Utilization of Restorative Practices. MS and HS students 9/4/18 - 6/26/18 J. Chase Train staff in Restorative practices to improve relationships among students and teachers, reduce disciplinary problems and build community. Create and share clear structures/protocols with the staff through the use of the Ladder of Referral to provide supports and MS and HS students 9/4/18 - 6/26/18 School Leaders and Deans 2018-19 CEP 21 9/5/18-6/26/18 School Leaders, Deans and Guidance Department End of each marking period Monthly for the 2018-19 school year Guidance Counselors Principal, AP of Guidance, Guidance Counselor's Office, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, Pupil Accounting Secretary, ENL Coordinator interventions for students' demonstrated need in a timely manner. The Offices of Student Support and Guidance will work to create a peer mentoring program in grades 6-12 that will aim to provide more positive supports to students who are struggling. Peer mentors and mentees Guidance counselors will review fail reports after each marking period, and will identify targeted students for interventions and additional support. Students Parent outreach through: Parents  providing communications in languages representative of our school community.  using social media to communicate with parents via our school website www.tapconyc.org and the Remind app to reach parents via phone.  establishing an easy system for teachers to regularly report student achievements via PupilPath.  distributing calendars so parents can record and are notified of upcoming events, assignments, and dates to check with teachers on their children’s progress. via Pupil Path and our school website.  providing training for school personnel on meaningful communication and collaboration with families via workshops after-school and on Saturdays. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Regular meetings from September '18 through June '19 with our Parent Coordinator and Cabinet to ensure sharing of key resources, dates, and supports. Parents were made aware of Advisory in the first Parent Newsletter sent out in October 2018. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Weekly meetings of AP with Deans, Guidance and Teachers. 2. Per session will be utilized to pay for professional development and meetings provided on and off-site after school hours by the DOE, network, consultants, and administration (no per session except for AP). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. The last Monday of each month, OORS reports/anecdotals/dean referrals will be analyzed to identify trends and gauge effectiveness of action plan steps.. 2. In order to track progress towards our goal, we will be administering a survey to a sample of teachers, students and parents with questions modeled after the school survey in the subjects of safety, order and support, in January 2019. Based on this data, we will then reassess the action steps in order to target the greatest areas of need. 3. At the conclusion of the 2nd and 3rd marking period, the Guidance department will compare the number of students assigned failing grades from the previous marking period to ensure a reduction in the number of failures. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports, anecdotals/deans referrals, surveys, targeted intervention reports, fail reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS:   School leaders and staff consistently communicate expectations that are connected to a path to college and career readiness, and offer teachers training and ongoing feedback. School leaders, teachers and staff establish a culture for learning that consistently communicates high expectations for all learners, and offer guidance/advisement supports to all learners.  Professional development opportunities for teachers and actionable feedback from school leaders support teachers’ progress towards expectations.  Coherent guidance and advisement structures ensure that students are prepared for the next level.  Teachers are engaged in ongoing professional development and collaborations.  All teachers self-assess performance using a needs assessment based on the Danielson Framework for Teaching, and identify individual professional goals aligned to the school’s instructional focus and performance goals.  The school’s graduation rate increased from 76% to 80%  Over 99% of graduating students were accepted into colleges, with scholarships awarded to students totaling over 1.2 million dollars NEEDS:  Co-teaching with clear differentiation and assessment for students across the academic spectrum is required.  Across classrooms, teachers use or create assessments, rubrics, and grading policies that are loosely aligned.  Formative assessments and teacher checks for understanding do not always provide a clear portrait of student mastery. Inconsistent assessment structures limit actionable feedback to students and teachers regarding student achievement, and the results of data analysis are inconsistently used to adjust curricula and instruction.   Teachers’ inconsistent use for checks for understanding hinders the development of effective instructional adjustments across classrooms.  Grading policies are not consistent across all content areas.  Rubrics used to assess student performance varied.   Across classrooms, there were few examples of self or peer assessment. Few students were able to articulate how their grades on assignments were calculated. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 24  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the combined average MOTP will increase in Danielson components 1a and 1e by 10% across all teachers, 15% for new teachers, and 20% for Arts Teachers in 1a, 1e, and 3d as a result of targeted professional development and teacher team meetings. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Ensure that all teachers have access to, and utilize the DataDriven Classroom (DDC) platform, to be able to design CCLS aligned assessments. Teachers Students 9/5/18-1/28/19 APs of Instruction Ensure that all teachers have access to the ATLAS Rubicon curriculum mapping platform, to be able to design CCLS aligned tasks. Teachers APs of Instruction (1st bench-mark) cycles until 6/13- end of school year 9/5/18-1/28/19 (1st bench-mark) cycles until 6/13- end of school year Lock in the department-wide grading policy on SKEDULA. Provide collaborative opportunities for teachers to create commonly scaled rubrics that can be used across classrooms. Teachers Students Teachers Create educational norms, which enable teachers to review the grading policy and rubrics in all classrooms. Teachers Students Create opportunities in the schedules to set weekly co-planning for ICT and ENL classes, departmental meetings and grade-level meetings to provide opportunities for looking at student work, planning differentiation, and emphasizing Q and D and Assessment in instruction through the sharing of best practices and resources amongst staff. Teachers 9/5/18 APs of Instruction APs of Instruction APs of Instruction Model Teachers Model Teachers 9/5/18-1/28/19 9/5/18-1/28/19 By 10/1 Set Schedule - Implement Full Year Resources include: WeTeachNYC Hub 2018-19 CEP 26  Level of Sophistication Rubric EngageNY Implement, support and use inter-visitation cycles where Model Teachers and Instructional Leads model strategies and provide feedback on formative assessment strategies for teachers to use in their lessons to gather data to drive their future instruction. All Teachers 9/5/18-1/28/19 APs of Instruction (1st bench-mark) cycles until 6/13- end of school year APs of Instruction, Model Teachers and Professional Development Team Principal, AP of Guidance, Guidance Counselor's Office, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, Pupil Accounting Secretary Identify, devise and deliver co-teaching strategies during professional development on Monday afternoons, departmental and grade level meetings. All Teachers 9/5/18 until 6/13/19 Parent outreach by our Parent Coordinator and Parent Association through: Parents Monthly for the 2018-19 school year  providing communications in languages representative of our school community.  using social media to communicate with parents via our school website www.tapconyc.org and the Remind app to reach parents via phone.  establishing an easy system for teachers to regularly report student achievements via PupilPath.  distributing calendars so parents can record and are notified of upcoming events, assignments, and dates to check with teachers on their children’s progress. via Pupil Path and our school website.  providing training for school personnel on meaningful communication and collaboration with families via workshops after school and on Saturdays. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Regular meetings from September '18 through June '19 with our Parent Coordinator and Cabinet to ensure sharing of key resources, dates, and supports. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 27  1. Weekly meetings of AP with Model Teachers and Instructional Leads to assess progress and plan or adjust future PD. 2. Per session will be utilized to pay for professional development and meetings provided on and off-site after school hours by the DOE, network, consultants, and administration (no per session except for AP). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Our administrators will conduct analyses of Informal and Formal Observations at regular interval dates as determined in concert with our TDEC from the Superintendent's Office to evaluate growth in teacher practice in Assessment in the Classroom and success in adjusting teaching based on data analysis of students actual exams (essays) and item analysis. 2. Principal and Assistant Principal will evaluate meeting notes and goals provided by all team meetings on a weekly basis Principal and Assistant Principal will evaluate meeting notes and goals provided by all team meetings on a weekly basis. 3. Six-week benchmarks, using the Data Driven Classroom (DDC) will reveal % of student mastery and individual student mastery of taught Standards-Aligned Skills and Subject Area Content . 4. Midterm will be administered in January as a full Regents exam, and results will be analyzed to adjust curriculum for Term 2. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reports in ADVANCE and DDC well as midterm results at the end of January and June '19. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Assessing the results of the School Survey as related to student performance trends, the Principal considered how to best continually create a climate of inclusiveness and provide staff and students with a clear vision for student achievement while seeking input of all members of the school.  Took into account in our school's strength and needs analysis was our overall student achievement in our Middle and High Schools in: academic performance leading to college and career readiness, and; artistic accomplishment as per the published mandate in the Middle and High School directories as a screened school of the Arts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have implemented data driven instruction throughout the year, monitoring academic progress at end of marking period meetings with targeted teacher supports, resulting in a 10% increase in scholarship rates in all academic subject areas based on credit accumulation. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principals, and Teacher PD Team working with: District Public, Bronx Field Support Instructional Coaches, Office of Arts and Special Projects, , and NYC Teaching Fellows. Constant sharing and solicitation of Information of pedagogical, organizational, and other resources Teachers and Staff 9/5/18-1/28/19 (1st bench-mark) cycles until 6/13- end of school year  District Public data disaggregation and PD for teachers to   improve at data-driven instruction Learning Partners host school to share best practices across three schools Superintendent Office- school-based support by Phillip Paniritis (Social Studies), Judith Gouraige (Science), and others.  Office of Arts and Special Projects- Bronx Borough Arts Director Joanna Berenson's selection of TAPCo as site for Borough Arts PD  Differentiated PD  Ensuring “Creature Comforts" so that my entire school community will become more engaged, empathetic and responsible participants.  Custodial forms- to Annie  Health & Safety- UFT Executive Committee   Office Hours for all Admin  Up to Date Calendars (PD, Performances, Trips, Suggestion Box Assemblies, Parent meetings, etc.)  Individual check in with teachers and review of scholarship reports Teachers  Create action plan with teachers based on the data from Students End of Each Marking Period Administration the scholarship reports  Attending co-planning and grade level meetings of teachers to help them plan ways to implement their action plans based on the conversations surrounding the scholarship reports   Improve college and career readiness index by ensuring that students are registered for college board, signed up to take SAT/PSAT, signed up for AP exams as needed Students who need to retake regents will be registered and informed of the need to retake them, and will be Students Ongoing Administration Counselors Teachers 2018-19 CEP 30  provided with opportunities for after school regents prep courses Students will be made aware of Khan Academy SAT prep and students in the AP for ALL program will use the Albert.i.o system to prepare for AP Exams and SAT tests. Continue to foster strong and productive collaborations among educators, artists and community members for creating rich interdisciplinary learning opportunities for our students and staff.  Cooperative and joint pursuits to increase opportunities and the academic achievements of our students of color, ELL students, and SWD students. Outreach and collaboration with Bronx politicians: o Council Member Torres, Bronx Borough President Ruben Diaz Jr.,  Roof top garden/classroom/performance space SCA site survey conducted with capital funding support by Council Member Ritchie Torres  92Y ATT & CASA Grants to support student design and construction of a $1.4 M rooftop garden/performance/classroom space o Bring a Jazz at Lincoln Center Instrumental Program to our Middle School (382 students, parents, and staff have already signed a petition)  Pursuing further RESO A technology grants and school lockers  Bringing International touring artists The Sessions for City-Wide panel for all DOE schools, 9/5/18-1/28/19 (1st bench-mark) cycles until 6/13- end of school year Teachers, Parents, Students, Staff, and Members of the Community (parent association, student council and external partners) Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher PD Team working with: STEM Connect, Council Member Torres, Congressman Serrano, School Construction Authority, Division of School Facilities, Bronx Council of the Arts, Parent Association, Jazz at Lincoln Center, Bronx Borough President's Office, and The Sessions. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Regular meetings from September '18 through June '19 with our Parent Coordinator and Cabinet to ensure sharing of key resources, dates, and supports. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 31  1. Weekly meetings of Principal with Assistant Principals to assess progress and plan or adjust future visits with collaborators and/or PD. 2. Per session will be utilized to pay for professional development and meetings provided on and off-site after school hours by the DOE, consultants, and administration (no per session except for AP). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Principal will assess progress of all initiatives at the end of the 1st Semester (1/16) and the end of the 2nd Semester (6/16) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Surveys of teachers, meeting notes, progress with partners. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths 96% of families say that they feel respected by their child's teachers. (Q1f 93% of families say that they feel respected by their child's principal. (Q1i) 92% of students say that their teachers respect their culture or background. (Q1i) 92% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. (Q1a) 91% of families say that they are satisfied with the overall quality of their child's teachers this year. (Q5c) 2. Priority needs  More students applying to TAPCo by December 3, 2018.  Continued growth in our PA, SLT and individual parent participation rates in workshops and parent teacher conferences  Parent & Art Workshops/Showings Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As the result of targeted outreach efforts through developing strong relationships with families, businesses, community-based organizations, and other schools, by June 2019, we will increased (1) applications to TAPCo for High School by 100% (2) applications to TAPCO for Middle School by 30%, (3) attendance to student performances by 30%, and (4) parent attendance at workshops by 20%. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students and parents will be provided with a registration letter. Students and Parents Sept 2018 School Principal, AP of Guidance Designate a registration table at the school’s Open House/Parent Teacher Conferences. Parents Fall All teachers, guidance and dean staff will be constantly monitoring student profiles on SKEDULA. 2018 Students and Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Create protocols for ensuring that all items of student/parent folders are in place. Parents Sept 2018 Office Staff School Principal, AP of Guidance Office Staff School Principal, AP of Guidance, Teachers, Guidance Department & Deans School Principal, AP of Guidance Office Staff Parent outreach by our new Parent Coordinator and Parent Association through: Parents Sept 2018- School Principal, June 2019 AP of Guidance, Parent Coordinator, and Parent Association sharing about our new Parent Center   providing communications in languages representative of our school community.  use social media to communicate with parents via our school website www.tapconyc.org and the Remind app to reach parents via phone.  establishing an easy system for teachers to regularly report student achievements via PupilPath.  distributing calendars so parents can record and are notified of upcoming events, assignments, and dates to check with teachers on their children’s progress via Pupil Path and our school website.  providing training for school personnel on meaningful communication and collaboration with families via workshops after school and on Saturdays. 2018-19 CEP 34  Representing at Middle School Fairs at other schools Students  Taking a road show to other school campuses Students  Middle School Guidance Counselor Luncheons at TAPCo Middle School Guidance Counselors  Flyer distribution Team Students By December 3, 2018 Principal, Teachers, Parents, and current Students of TAPCo By December 3, 2018 Principal, Teachers, Parents, and current Students of TAPCo In November 2018 Principal, Teachers, Parents, and current Students of TAPCo By December 3, 2018 Principal, Teachers, Parents, and current Students of TAPCo Churches Libraries Community Centers Dance Studios in the Bronx Middle Schools attended by TAPCo students  Email outreach about audition dates  Creation of Arts Only Website  Auditions during school hours By December 3, 2018 Principal, Teachers, Parents, and current Students of TAPCo Middle and Elementary School Principals and Guidance Counselors Students, Families and other Schools By December 3, 2018 Principal Students, Families and other Schools By December 3, 2018 Principal, Teachers, Parents, and current Students of TAPCo 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Regular meetings from September '18 through June '19 with our Parent Coordinator and Cabinet to ensure sharing of key resources, dates, and supports. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 35  1. Weekly meetings of AP with Deans and Guidance. 2. Per session will be utilized to pay for meetings provided on and off-site after school hours by the DOE, (no per session except for AP). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Percentage reports of registered parents will be printed out on the last Monday of each month by DataCation Administrator. 2. School Leaders will convene to create protocols for checklist that ensures all items of student folders are complete. 3. All teachers, guidance staff, and deans will utilize their weekly Parent Time to identify parents who have yet to register for workshops, with a working e-mail address. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly monitoring of parent email harvesting as part of agenda items during Cabinet meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) High school students who entered as part of the city’s bottom 1/3 where entered into AIS. Students work on skills and strategies associated with the ELA Regents exams including but not limited to reading comprehension, reading analysis, identifying elements of literature and organization of writing. Middle school students who entered the year identified in the city’s bottom 1/3 based on their state ELA test scores entered into AIS. Skills and practice include but are not limited to reading comprehension, reading analysis, identifying elements of literature and organization of writing. ELA Regents Prep High school students who entered as part of the city’s bottom Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Service is being provided Tuesday, Wednesdays and Thursday from 8:30-9:08 prior to the start of the official school day. After school Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday from 3:30-5:15 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) In general education classroom ratio is no greater than 10 students to 1 teacher. In special education classroom, ratio is no greater than 5 students to 1 teacher. Targeted students who have sat and failed the ELA regents get after school tutoring in small groups. In general education classroom ratio is no greater than 10 Service is being provided Tuesday, Wednesdays and When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) High school students who entered as part of the city’s bottom 1/3 where entered into AIS. Students work on skills and strategies associated with the ELA Regents exams including but not limited to reading comprehension, reading analysis, identifying elements of literature and organization of writing. Middle school students who entered the year identified in the city’s bottom 1/3 based on their state ELA test scores entered into AIS. Skills and practice include but are not limited to reading comprehension, reading analysis, identifying elements of literature and organization of writing. ELA Regents Prep High school students who entered as part of the city’s bottom 2018-19 CEP 37  Science 1/3 where entered into AIS. Students work on skills and strategies associated with the Math Regents exams including but not limited to analyzing word problems, solving and factoring equations, identifying how to maximize credit on Part II-IV of the Regents Exam. Middle school students who entered the year identified in the city’s bottom 1/3 based on their state Math test scores entered into AIS. Skills and practice include but are not limited to analyzing word problems, solving and factoring equations, identifying how to maximize credit and strengthening basic algebraic concepts. Algebra Regents Prep High school students who entered as part of the city’s bottom 1/3 where entered into AIS. Students work on skills and strategies associated with the Living Environment and Earth Science Regents exams including but not limited to test taking strategies. Middle school students who entered the year identified in the city’s bottom 1/3 based on Thursday from 8:30-9:08 prior to the start of the official school day. After school Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday from 3:30-5:15. students to 1 teacher. In special education classroom, ratio is no greater than 5 students to 1 teacher. Targeted students who have sat and failed the ELA regents get after school tutoring in small groups. Service is being provided Tuesday, Wednesdays and Thursday from 8:30-9:08 prior to the start of the official school day. After school Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday from 3:30-5:15 In general education classroom ratio is no greater than 10 students to 1 teacher. In special education classroom, ratio is no greater than 5 students to 1 teacher. Targeted students who have sat and failed the Living Environment regents get after school tutoring in small groups 1/3 where entered into AIS. Students work on skills and strategies associated with the Math Regents exams including but not limited to analyzing word problems, solving and factoring equations, identifying how to maximize credit on Part II-IV of the Regents Exam. Middle school students who entered the year identified in the city’s bottom 1/3 based on their state Math test scores entered into AIS. Skills and practice include but are not limited to analyzing word problems, solving and factoring equations, identifying how to maximize credit and strengthening basic algebraic concepts. Algebra Regents Prep High school students who entered as part of the city’s bottom 1/3 where entered into AIS. Students work on skills and strategies associated with the Living Environment and Earth Science Regents exams including but not limited to test taking strategies. Middle school students who entered the year identified in the city’s bottom 1/3 based on 2018-19 CEP 38  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) their state ELA test scores entered into AIS. Skills and practice include but are not limited reading non-fiction texts and making claims and supporting with evidence. Living Environment Test Prep High school students who entered as part of the city’s bottom 1/3 where entered into AIS. Students work on skills and strategies associated with the Global Studies and U.S. History Regents exams including but not limited to test taking strategies. Middle school students who entered the year identified in the city’s bottom 1/3 based on their state ELA test scores entered into AIS. Skills and practice include but are not limited reading non-fiction texts and making claims and supporting with evidence. Global Studies and U.S. History Regents prep. In addition to mandated counseling, students are scheduled for additional academic and other counseling. their state ELA test scores entered into AIS. Skills and practice include but are not limited reading non-fiction texts and making claims and supporting with evidence. Living Environment Test Prep High school students who entered as part of the city’s bottom 1/3 where entered into AIS. Students work on skills and strategies associated with the Global Studies and U.S. History Regents exams including but not limited to test taking strategies. Middle school students who entered the year identified in the city’s bottom 1/3 based on their state ELA test scores entered into AIS. Skills and practice include but are not limited reading non-fiction texts and making claims and supporting with evidence. Global Studies and U.S. History Regents prep. In addition to mandated counseling, students are scheduled for additional academic and other counseling. Service is being provided Tuesday, Wednesdays and Thursday from 8:30-9:08 prior to the start of the official school day After school Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday from 3:30-5:15 In general education classroom ratio is no greater than 10 students to 1 teacher. In special education classroom, ratio is no greater than 5 students to 1 teacher. Targeted students who have sat and failed the U.S History and Global Studies regents get after school tutoring in small groups. Individual support or small group based on provider discretion Service is being provided Tuesday, Wednesdays and Thursday from 8:30-9:08 prior to the start 2018-19 CEP 39  of the official school day. As needed throughout the school day Astor Children Services are also available to see students at-risk Guidance Counselor and Social Workers provide mandated counseling as per student IEP. Nurse on staff to address student health conditions such as diabetes, seizures and asthma. Individual or small group based on IEP mandate Small group or large group instruction based on the needs of the school Individual service, meeting occur periodically, students are reviewed every 6 weeks to check on progress Response to Intervention Astor Children Services are also available to see students at-risk Guidance Counselor and Social Workers provide mandated counseling as per student IEP. Nurse on staff to address student health conditions such as diabetes, seizures and asthma. Response to Intervention 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 32 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 1) Academic Programs & educational support services 2) Transportation once student is permanently housed 3) Basic/emergency supplies 4) Counseling services 5) Parental involvement 6) emergency supplies such as uniforms, school supplies, books, and glasses. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A see above 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 41  N/A see above 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. I am reaching out to STH liason to confirm that this is the correct amount. 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To attract and encourage our current staff to become highly qualified, we develop action plans provide thorough professional development to our teachers in understanding the Common Core Standards Initiative. Teachers meet during weekly common planning sessions to discuss common core requirements, standards and the Common Core Aligned Tasks with Coaches and Data Specialist. New and tenured teachers are working together to share best practices for implementation. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High quality and ongoing professional development is provided to teachers from administrators, coaches and data specialists to all teachers and paraprofessionals. The designated staff who are providing this support to teachers attend workshops and trainings held by Central and 1 Fordham Plaza to becoming experts in their subject matter/topic before presenting it to teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 43  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are involved in school decision making in a variety of ways: all professional development takes place in teacher teams allowing teachers to shape that work in accordance with overall school goals articulated herein; Teacher Inquiry Teams explore the outcomes of their students’ work then provide feedback and suggestions into the goal-setting process. Changes in decisions about the choice of curricula and other resources, for example our new ELA and math curricula, were made by teachers after presentations by vendors and school Administration. Particular attention is paid to DOE School Survey data provided by teachers in assessing needs. Also, Instructional Leads meet weekly with Administration with action plans based on data, and provide suggestions for professional development and assist in determining efficacy of multiple assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal 430,410 0 12,366 X X X 2018-19 CEP 44 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) SEE ACTION PLAN. SEE ACTION PLAN. SEE ACTION PLAN.  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 4,302,173 X X SEE ACTION PLAN. SEE ACTION PLAN. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP 45   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. TAPCO (10X225), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. TAPCO (10X225) will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the No Child Left Behind Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) TAPCO (10X225), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 49  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 50  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 52  2018-19 CEP 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: TAPCo. currently serves 45 ELL students. This student population has 43 students that list Spanish as their home language, and 2 others. 35 students scored in the Expanding category on the NYSESLAT, 8 were identified as Transitioning, and 2 as Emerging. 14 students are in the Middle school (grades 6-8), while 31 students are currently enrolled in our high school. After analysis of NYSELSLAT results from the 2016-2017 school years, the TAPCo. ENL team found a need to address and support students specifically in the writing portion. The school has begun a school-wide initiative by implementing the Hochman Writing Method in order to provide additional support to the ELLs as well as the general education students. Students who tested as Expanding receive block scheduling in the High School to have extended time to address their academic needs. Middle school students (grades 6th-8th) are blocked together in the morning to address skills aligned to the common core curriculum and focus on language acquisition through content areas. Additionally, the classes support students learning across content areas and in tasks they might have received during the school day. The ENL teacher works individually with Emerging students in order to provide additional support and comply with the mandated time. All ENL students receive their grade level English Language Arts instruction co-taught by a certified ENL teacher. An instructional supplementary support program named After School ELL Academy was established to assist ENL students. All instruction is delivered in English with bilingual support where necessary. New materials were purchased to support the after school program including common core aligned graded textbooks such as Code X (middle school), Collections, Reading Explorer series and Continental's New York ELLs. Students receive targeted instruction in the four literacy domains through use of textbooks, workbooks and teacher-created materials. Students are grouped by grade and differentiated according to NYSESLAT proficiency levels. The after-school teachers integrate both ENL NYSESLAT and Common Core standards in planning and instruction. Both the bilingual and ENL teachers meet regularly to coordinate the after school program and share the data from NYSESLAT, classroom and state exams to meet individual needs of their students. Materials ordered for the after-school program include listening passages for all grades. Instruction planned around listening skills include dictation and note-taking (Hochman method), paraphrasing activities and use of organization skills so students can make use of their notes efficiently. A baseline has been created and will be administered at the after school program and students will be periodically assessed to monitor growth and inform the teachers how to modify instruction. Textbook and workbooks purchased are designed for the use specifically for the ELL after-school program. ENL teachers meet twice monthly with the ELA department to discuss meeting the needs of all learners and share techniques to support ENL learners. Make-Up and Rationale of the After School ELL Academy are as follows: The After school Academy will service 45 ELL students in grades 6-11. The program will be offered from December to May for 40 sessions. There will be two groups, one group of students in grades 6-8 with 14 students and one group of 31 students in grades 9-11. The program will take place Wednesday and Thursday from 2:45-4:00. Teachers include Norbert Goldberg, Maeve Donohoe and Melissa Skidelsky (ENL Certified). Wednesday we will service Grades 6 (8 students), and 7 (5 students) and 2 Grade 8 students. Thursday we will serve grades 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 9 (17 students), 10th (12 students), 11th (4 students). Instruction will focus on ELA support specifically in Writing for extended writing assignments in ELA, Social Studies and Science. Reading support will be offered to support content reading in Science and Social Studies. ENL students will receive support in language development, reading comprehension and listening activities in a small groups getting support on content area skills and literacy to improve understanding and develop as learners. Materials ordered for this after-school program include listening passages for all grades. Instruction skills planned around listening include dictation and note taking, paraphrasing activities and use of organization skills so students can make use of their notes efficiently. A baseline has been created and will be administered at the after school program and students will be periodically assessed to monitor growth and inform the teacher how to modify instruction. Textbook and workbooks purchased are designed for the use specifically for the after school program exclusively for our ELL student population. Saturday ELL Academy The Saturday ELL Academy will service 45 ELL students in grades 6-11. The program will be offered from February to April for 8 sessions from 9:00 to 11:00 AM. There will be two groups, one group of students in grades 6-8 with 14 students and one group of students grades 9-11 of 31 students. Teachers include Norbert Goldberg (ENL Certified) and Arelis Valdez (Bilingual Certified). Instruction will focus on ELA support specifically in Writing for extended writing assignments in ELA, Social Studies and Science. Reading support will be offered for content reading in Science and Social Studies. ELL students will receive small-group instruction in language development, reading comprehension and listening activities with emphasis on content area skills and literacy. Students will be exposed to activities that are similar to the NYSESLAT assessment. Students will work on listening activities, writing activities and reading comprehension activities using fiction and non-fiction text. Materials used include: Code X, Collections, Reading Explorer series and Continental's New York ELLs series for grades 6-11th as well as instructional materials created by the classroom teachers. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The ENL Coordinator, ENL teachers and Assistant Principal have attended several trainings provided by the Bronx Field Support Center including liasons meetings, Practical Tools for Rigorous Instruction, Nuts and Bolts, Co-teaching and EDAT training. Staff used the opportunity to analyze student data, discuss strategies for addressing TAPCo's ELLs specific needs and implementing effective co-teaching models to deliver instruction. The ENL team meets twice monthly to address department needs and the ENL coordinator provides at least 90 minutes of weekly mentoring to the rest of the ENL staff. The ENL coordinator also meets weekly with administration to discuss departmental concerns and important deadlines. ENL staff will be turn-keying the material at a full staff Professional Development as listed on our school Professional Development calendar. Staff is afforded opportunities to attend ELL-specific PDs as offered by New York City and the UFT. Several school-wide professional development sessions have included instruction and discussion of the Hochman writing method as it applies to both ELLs and gen-ed students. School clerical staff attends ELL trainings as offered by the 2018-19 CEP 56  Part C: Professional Development Bronx Field Support. ENL staff attends ELA department meetings to ensure best teacher practices and evaluate student progress. At these meetings, teachers develop action plans based on student data and share student work to assess progress and effectiveness. ENL co-teachers share methodology and ensure language development strategies are being implemented in the General Education classroom. For all teachers, we provide a common period of professional development/co-planning embedded in teacher programs which includes opportunities for co-planning with ENL teachers. Additionally, teachers meet in smaller groups on Tuesday afternoons with members of their department to develop their data action plans as described above. In addition, all teachers are trained in differentiatiated instruction to facilitate the teaching of special needs students, including ELLs. Instructional Lead Teachers meet weekly to discuss areas of concern at each grade and subject level. Work from teachers is memorialized via the online portal Dropbox. ENL teachers inform middle school and high school staff as to what knowledge and skills are being assessed on the NYSESLAT and regularly co-plan with the content area teacher to help shape instruction. Middle and high school staff members discuss student transition to high school. Additionally, Common Core state standards are aligned to facilitate the transition. Staff is exposed to strategies to assist ELLs and Students with Disabilities which include scaffolding of materials, finding proper resources for students, providing students with language frames that can be used in speaking and writing activities and accountable talk strategies. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: TAPCO parents have a bilingual Parent Coordinator available by phone or in person to address any parent questions or concerns. All parent workshops and Parent/Teacher conferences as well as informational sessions and student auditions have translators available in multiple languages including Spanish. There will be a parents of ENL Parent workshop that takes place in order to increase parental involvement. ENL teachers regularly communicate with parents to discuss student progress and address other parent concerns and are available for IEP parental meetings. TAPCo makes every effort to include parents of ELL students as members of the Parent Association. Our bilingual parent coordinator mails home all school documents and information translated into Spanish. The Parent Coordinator conducts workshops annually. He also assists parents by directing them to various organizations which provide services to address their specific needs. Topics have included Skedula training, fire safety, gang awareness, bullying, homeless and runaway awareness, students with disabilities, the new IEP and student performance access through online Pupil Path (online grade book). The workshops have Spanish speaking staff available to assist in translation as needed. Every month the parent newsletter is published and mailed home. Parents' needs are evaluated by surveys, phone calls and through conversations with individual students who may be experiencing hardships and difficulties. Based on the results of our surveys, we provide activities that will address parent’s interests as well as their needs. Because TAPCo is a Theatre Arts School, parents are encouraged to attend student performances. Parent Workshops: 1) Parents will be provided information on how they can support their children at home as well as information on after school activities to support 2018-19 CEP 57  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities ELL students in preparation for Spring ELA and Math assessments in the Middle School and Regents prep in the High School: Parent Coordinator Roque Bonilla and Assistant Principal Schaudt; 2) Parent introduction to NYSESLAT Preparation and State Graduation Guidelines/Parents of ELL students will be invited to learn about the NYSESLAT prep program and learn how they can support instruction at home. High school ELL parents will work with a Guidance Counselor to learn High School Graduation requirements and review the College Planning Handbook for ELLs and their families. Parents of ELL students will be invited to review the DOE College Handbook for ELLs, review their students Regents Results and be introduced to the Afternoon/Saturday Regents Prep program. Bilingual Facilitators: Parent Coordinator: Roque Bonilla, Guidance Counselor: Raul Acevedo, Social Worker: Vanessa Velez, School Psychologist: Rachel Carvajal, ENL Coordinator: Norbert Goldberg. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7,419  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other $1,236.60 $2,473.20 $1,236.60 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Instruction 1) $4,752 Per Diem 2) $2,667 Per Session (After-school & Saturday Academy) Professional Development 1) Provide teachers with professional development on ENL strategies. 2)Attendance at ENL conferences. OTPS 1) Purchase supplemental materials for CCLS aligned ELA & Math instruction (IXL) 2) Support implementation of newly adopted CCLS Math curriculum Learn Zillion. Parental Involvement 1) Provide staffing to plan and implement monthly parent meetings. 2018-19 CEP 58 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2) Provide staffing to complete and distribute required parental notifications. TOTAL $12,366 2018-19 CEP 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Theatre Arts Production Company School Borough Bronx School Number 225 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ron Link Coach Anita Bushi ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Norbert Goldberg Teacher/Subject Area Arelis Valdez Teacher/Subject Area Maeve Donahoe Related-Service Provider Raul Acevedo Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Demitri Nicolopoulos Coach type here School Counselor Eileen Houlahan & Raul Acevedo Parent Denise Figueroa Parent Coordinator Roque Bonilla Field Support Center Staff Member Wladimir Pierre Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 602 2018-19 CEP 60 Total number of ELLs 47 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.81%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Based on 2017 NYSESLAT scores and baseline assessments, there is a clear deficit in writing skills among ELLs. TAPCo's school-wide instructional focus incorporates the Hochman Writing method to address this deficit. TAPCo also uses a series of teacher created curriculum embedded assessments which are designed to measure and track NYSESLAT skills (Speaking, listening, reading and writing) as a well as vocabulary, language functions, grammar, and discourse. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ENL teachers are provided with time and resources to develop these assessments. We use DDC to track student progress. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 61  Targeted Professional Development occurs between ENL and General Education staff to ensure that the needs of all learners are being met in the planning/creation of lessons, documented in lesson planning and observed during instruction of the ENL population in classes culminating in Regents exams and the NYSESLAT. Based on 2017 NYSESLAT scores, baseline and periodic assessments (teacher created curriculum embedded assessments) , there is a clear deficit in writing skills among ELLs. TAPCo's schoolwide instructional focus incorporates the Hochman Writing method to address this deficit. TAPCo also uses a series of teacher created curriculum embedded assessments. Co-planning and observation protocols are followed in order to support instructional planning for the ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? AIS surrounding ENL students take place after school and, during lunch time. TAPCO utilizes ICT style classroom settings to ensure that teachers can differentiate lessons appropriately based on students individual needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not Applicable (RTI), TAPCo is a 6-12 school with no K-5 students. In addition to receiving in-school ENL services, 6-12 grade students are provided with after-school support services (available Thursday and Saturday) which address student's individual academic and literacy needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The school is currently in good standing. The good standing indicates that we have met AYP for all subgroups including ELLs. TAPCo uses NYSESLAT results as one measure of student progress. The 2017 data indicates that while the majority of ELLs remained at the same proficiency level, there were 20% of ELLs who advanced one level. Specific areas of improvement were noted in the writing and speaking modalities. Reading Periodic assessments of ELLs are used to identify progress and to determine areas of need. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL team meets regularly administration and with both content and grade level teams to ensure data is disseminated weekly. The ENL team is given time during PD sessions to ensure that content teachers are aware of upcoming items and how to address them. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In grades 6-8, students with ENL service are blocked together per grade. As a result, students receive integrated ENL services with no disruption and full inclusion into the General Education curriculum. Students in MS receive instruction using the ICT model whereby the content teacher and an ENL teacher work in tandem to meet instructional goals and language objectives. Students are in classes that are heterogeneously grouped and are grouped in their general education classes based on results of data-based assessment and city and state assessment results. Currently, there is one Middle School student and one High School student receiving integrated co-teaching in addition to a stand-alone class in order to comply with necessary requirements. An ENL teacher provides individual 2018-19 CEP 62  instruction to those two students based on their NYSESLAT scores and academic literacy needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. Currently, there is no TBE program based on parent choice and not having reached the threshold for implementing this program. c. DL program. If applicable. Currently there is no DL program based on parent choice. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL coordinator and programmer meet to ensure compliance with new mandates for students based on CR Part 154. All ENL students are receiving ELA in their general education classes in conjunction with the ENL co-teacher in grades 6-12. All students required to have stand alone ENL have that programmed into their schedules. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas are co-taught by teachers certified in those areas and ENL teachers who employ instructional strategies such as scaffolding, background, prior knowledge, vocabulary instruction, group and individual practice of all skills and phonic awareness supported by the ENL co-teacher. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Based on their home language surveys, virtually all TAPCo students have a home language of Spanish. The ENL coordinator, school programmer and administrator in charge of testing make sure that, where necessary , all assessments are ordered in Spanish to make sure those students entitled receive these easements at the time of testing. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status As per CR Part 154.2, all ELLs are receiving the mandated number of stand-alone and integrated minutes consistent with their proficiency level. i.e. Emerging students receive 540 minutes of integrated and stand-alone instruction. Teachers embed in their lesson plans the of type of co-teaching model to be used in the lesson and the rationale for that choice based on previous assessments, examination of data and co-planning decisions. In addition co-planning is done so resources can be ordered that have different access points for all learners. Learning Progressions are used to differentiate instruction. The school does not have any SIFE students since they have performed at or above the transitioning/intermediate level, and are therefore receiving services consistent with their level. In addition to receiving 90 minutes of ENL services and testing accommodations, former ELL's (up to two years after exiting ELL status) are provided differentiation including scaffolding and organizational tools. Long term ELL's are given direct feedback as to next steps based on content and ENL teacher conferencing and feedback. As per CR Part 154.2 students are placed into appropriate program mode consistent with their level of proficiency. Instruction is adapted to meet the needs and establish entry points for all learners. Developing and Newcomer ELLs are provided with various types of scaffolding materials including readings, glossaries/dictionaries, graphic organizers, writing prompts and sentence starters. Additionally, testing accommodations are given to the ENL student based on eligibility. 2018-19 CEP 63  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? . ELL and teachers of Students with Disabilities co-plan with general education teachers whereas curriculum maps are created, lesson plans are adapted and materials scaffolded in an effort to meet the needs of all learners. Adapted lesson are often stored using the Atlas Curriculum Maps online system. Teacher’s also use technology and cater lessons using varied entry points (art, maps, movies, documentaries etc.). The Special Education coordinator ensures all ELL-SWD students receive their mandates service in accordance with their IEPs by reviewing all student and programming accordingly. Special Education Coordinator makes sure reviews are conducted in a timely manner, ESL and SPED department teachers meet weekly to discuss student's individualized needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL teachers participate and assist in authoring the IEP document. At that time alternate programs are discussed so students ELL/SPED students have access to a program that best meets their academic and social needs. A program choice that is less restrictive is always discussed at that time and if a new program is deemed to benefit the students’ needs he/she is given a new program at that time. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. As part of our data analysis related to instructional best practices, we have concluded that our ELL population needs additional assistance in math (both middle and high school) and social studies (high school). Based on NYSESLAT results, classroom assessments and teacher observations, writing is an area that presents specific challenges. TAPCo. has introduced the Hochman method to support writing for ELLs as well as general education students. An after school Creative Writing Workshop has also been introduced. ELL students often struggle with the reading and interpretation of questions. This becomes a great obstacle for them when they take state exams. To that end, they are provided with extra supports such as Regents prep three days a week after school and on Saturdays, home work/study club. Translation dictionaries and glossaries by subject are also made available for use in class, during exams and at home. Also, scaffolding, background, prior knowledge, vocabulary instruction, practice of all the skills and phonic awareness are teaching strategies employed by all of our teachers who teach ELL students. Both co-teachers integrate native language where appropriate. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? TAPCo has implemented the ICT model for classroom instruction. We have appointed an ENL coordinator to ensure compliance and to work with the other two ENL teachers as a mentor. The school has also implemented the Hochman method to reinforce writing across all content areas. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The school did not have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are given equal access to the full general education curriculum, in addition to all after school programs (i.e. Regents prep, Creative Writing Club, sports and art performances. SASF academic programs which include ELA, Math, STEM and Science are available for all Middle School students including ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In terms of technology, students are allowed access to the same computer labs and media programs as any other student in our school. The ENL teacher confers with subject area co-teacher about language acquisition strategies. The use of technology (video, audio) is integrated into the lesson in order to provide different entry points for the content. Lesson plans include both a content and a separate language objective. ENL teachers use a variety of scaffolding strategies (graphic organizers, sentence 2018-19 CEP 64  frames, glossaries, visuals and writing prompts to ensure vocabulary acquisition. Materials used include Connected Math 3, Scholastic Code-X curriculum aligned with the common care state standards. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered through the use of materials such as dictionaries, glossaries, and content reading passage translations where necessary Bilingual teachers provide home language support when appropriate. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. School administration as well as lead teachers periodically review materials and texts for grade and age appropriateness. ELLs are supported in order for them to achieve grade standards. The ENL coordinator meets regularly with the other ENL teachers providing mentorship and discussing instructional concerns; minutes of the meetings are recorded and documented. Regularly scheduled team meetings, administrative observations and mentoring are provided in order to support ELL's in all grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In terms of technology, students are allowed access to the same computer labs and media programs as any other student in our school. The ENL teacher confers with subject area co-teacher about language acquisition strategies. The use of technology (video, audio) is integrated into the lesson in order to provide different entry points for the content. Lesson plans include both a content and a separate language objective. ENL teachers use a variety of scaffolding strategies (graphic organizers, sentence frames, glossaries, visuals and writing prompts to ensure vocabulary acquisition. Materials used include Connected Math 3, Scholastic Code-X curriculum aligned with the common care state standards. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). During student enrollment and throughout the audition process, parents of ELLs and incoming ELL students have the opportunity to speak to the appropriate ELL pedagogue as well as receive additional information regarding the ENL programs offered at TAPCo. We invite families to special ELL events to build community and trust. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELL’s are currently offered the foreign languages offered to general education students. This year the school offers Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? For all teachers, we provide a common period of professional development/co-planning embedded in teacher programs. Teachers meet in smaller groups based on subject area/grade/ or particular student. In addition, teachers are trained in differentiation of instruction to facilitate the teaching of special needs students, including ELLs. Each subject area team gets together to conduct item analysis of state exams to determine students' strengths and weaknesses and to drive 2018-19 CEP 65  instruction for improving these areas. Instructional Lead Teachers meet weekly to discuss the areas of concern at each grade and subject level. Inquiry spaces have also been set up by each department in both the middle and high schools as a forum for colleagues to share information and to gather resources to help them develop their practice across content areas. For all other members of the school community Professional development opportunities are offered for school administration, school paraprofessionals, school guidance counselors, parent coordinator and members of the School Based Supprt Team. ENL teachers regularly attend district-wide PD's and have mentoring meetings with the ENL coordinator to discuss implementation of new strategies and initiatives. The ENL Coordinator meets separately with other district ENL liaisons for specialized PD's (e.g. Co teaching models, use of EDAT in analyzing and interpreting data) and is in contact with members of The Borough Field support center (Ms. Bushi, Mr. Pierre). ENL teachers has the ability to partake in all Professional development offered at the school throughout the year. In addition, ENL teachers are informed via email about all Professional Developments offered by our schools support network, city wide and UFT run PD’s. Instructional PD's are offered that are aligned to common core state standards to ensure ELL students receive rigorous instruction. The ENL teachers regularly attend PD's which focus on supporting ELLs by using Progressions to structure instruction geared to the CCLS. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As per CR part 154.2, all teachers receive 15% of total hours for ELL-specific professional development. ENL teachers receive 50% of total hours for ELL-specific professional development. ENL teachers inform middle school and high school staff as to what knowledge and skills are being assessed on the NYSESLAT. ENL teachers co-plan with content area teachers to help shape instruction for ELL students. Middle school and high school staff members discuss student transition to high school. Additionally. Guidance Counselors attend monthly professional development sessions which include how to best support parents as well as Parent Coordinator workshops and trainings for ESL coordinator. Guidance Counselors are offered ENL PD to assist in helping parents and students. The ENL team provides turnkeys which share the latest information on ELL support through regularly scheduled PD's. Staff is exposed to strategies to assist ELLs which include scaffolding of materials, finding proper resources for students, providing students with language frames that can be used in speaking and writing activities, sentence and paragraph frames, accountable talk strategies. The ENL Coordinator meets with other ENL liaisons for specific PDs. Regular meetings are scheduled between the ENL Coordinator and administration to discuss compliance issues and instructional concerns. ENL teachers keep records of weekly departmental meetings which are uploaded and subject to review by the administration . School-led Professional Activities are stored on the school website. Resources remain for teachers to reference and keep for records. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent meetings happen once a semester with the parents and the student present. In that meeting, led by the ENL Coordinator and in conjunction with the ENL Teachers, we discuss goals and progress that the student has made. We use current grades, latest NYSESLAT results , and teacher observations to determine action plans for the student. The ENL Coordinator speaks Spanish and translates to the parents all the information shared. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 66  There is an ENL parent workshop for all parents of the school in which we inform all Parents of students' rights. There has been past ENL parent membership on TAPCo. Parent Teams. Every year the Parent Coordinator reaches out to parents of ENL students via letters in English and Spanish, as well as making phone outreach to personally invite parents to join the School Leadership Team. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Lincoln Center Jazz for Young People on Tour: Let Freedom Swing, Lincoln Center Theater Song writing in the Schools Program, Lincoln Center Open Stages, Little Kids Rock, The Broadway League Theater Spring Internships, Park Avenue Armory Education Series with the Royal Shakespeare Company, Circle in the Square Teens on Broadway, Sticks 'n Skins, The Sessions, Scholastic Arts Competition, Fred Dolan Art Academy, English Speaking Union's Annual Shakespeare Monologue Competition, NYU’s Tisch School of the Arts Inter-Cultural Collaborations with Local Teens, Lehman College Bronx Arts Education Network. We also became a Professional Development Site for Lehman’s College of Education. We have student teachers in the classroom and 18 graduate student DOE teachers working every Wednesday with four TAPCo. Special Education teachers and many of our students to improve their Math and ELA skills. 2018-19 CEP 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ron Link, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: TAPCo. School DBN: 10x225 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ron Link Title Principal Demetri Nicolopoulos Assistant Principal Roque Bonilla Parent Coordinator Norbert Goldberg ENL/Bilingual Teacher Denise Figueroa Parent Arelis Valdez/Science Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Skidelsky Teacher/Subject Area NA NA Coach Coach Raul Acevedo School Counselor Carron Staple Anita Bushi NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2/01/2018 2/01/2018 2/01/2018 2/01/2018 2/01/2018 2/01/2018 02/01/18 NA NA 2/01/2018 02/01/2018 02/01/2018 NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X225 School Name: TAPCo. Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Roque Bonilla Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language Survey reveals that parents of TAPCo. prefer written and oral communication in English or Spanish, as a result all written communication to the home from the school is sent in English and in Spanish. We have a bilingual Parent Coordinator, School based support team and several members of the general education staff available to translate for faculty and parents. Student emergency cards are collected at our school and preferred home language information is transferred to online systems such as SESIS and PupilPath so teachers and staff are aware of families home language preferences. Parent Coordinator takes the time to personally know each family/parent/guardian in the school and makes sure if a particular family member does not understand English that they are provided language access translation services immediately via the Language access line. From the Parent Coordinator's experience majority of all the parents who speak a native language other than Spanish have an advance proficiency in the English Language. 2018-19 CEP 70  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Polish Turkish Bengali Fulani Soninke 562 288 1 4 2 2 1 65.35 33.49 0.12 0.47 0.23 0.23 0.12 562 286 1 4 2 2 2 65.42 33.29 0.12 0.47 0.23 0.23 0.23 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Welcome letter September Summer materials letter June Parent teacher Conference Letters September, November, March, May/June How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Welcome Letter is is written in both English and Spanish, approved and backpacked to the students and sent in a e-mail blast to the parents. The school will use the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit in order to provide language assistance to LEP parents who speak a non-covered language or a language not spoken by school personnel. TAPCo. staff work together to make sure that all summer materials are translated into Spanish and distributed accordingly. All Parent Teacher Conference correspondences (flyer, letter, phone and e-mail blasts are translated and 2018-19 CEP 71  School Newsletters Monthly Parent Workshops Monthly Art Performance Announcements Monthly Summer School information June Announcements Lock Down/Safety Announcements Monthly as required/needed delivered to the parents on a timely basis (10 days prior). The school will use the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit in order to provide language assistance to LEP parents who speak a non-covered language or a language not spoken by school personnel. Newsletters are done monthly. Newsletters are translated, printed and available for parents in the main office all month and year long. Parent Coordinator is bilingual in Spanish and translates for the parents as required during the monthly workshops. I always make sure parents are comfortable and understand what is being said and going on and if they don't, they are assisted in a respectful manner. All workshop materials (flyer's, letters and notifications are done in English and Spanish). The school will use the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit in order to provide language assistance to LEP parents who speak a non-covered language or a language not spoken by school personnel. Arts Performance notifications are always translated and any materials for the performance are translated from English and Spanish. TAPCo. staff work together to make sure that all summer school info is translated accordingly for the parents. The school will use the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit in order to provide language assistance to LEP parents who speak a non-covered language or a language not spoken by school personnel. Whenever there is a lock down, parents are sent home a letter in Spanish and English along with an e-mail and phone blast in both languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 72  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Welcome New Student Orientation June/September Open House for New Students June/September Art Performances Committee Monthly during the school year SLT Monthly during the school year Dean's visit Daily/Weekly during the school year Parent picking up child early from school Daily/Weekly during the school year. Parent/Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May/June interpretation service(s)? TAPCo. has staff members that are fluent in Spanish and able to translate. We always ask who requires translation and make sure it is provided. TAPCo. has staff members that are fluent in Spanish and able to translate. We always ask who requires translation and make sure it is provided. TAPCo. has staff members that are fluent in Spanish and able to translate. We always ask who requires translation and make sure it is provided. During the SLT Meetings there is always Spanish Speaking TAPCO Staff available on sight to translate. Whenever the Deans require translation services, they set up their meetings prior with the parents unless there is some urgent situation, we have on sight staff to assist with translation and they are also aware of the translation services number. We communicate with parents in both English and Spanish if they need to pick up their child early to please advise the main office with a letter, phone call where there is dual verification or e-mail correspondence. If an e-mail or letter is received in Spanish it is translated and then entered as a I-Log case. Each day as parents come in we make sure they are aware of the rules of the road. During all Parent Teacher Conferences parents receive materials in English and Spanish. Teachers are given again a letter with the translation number, school code (10X225) and Code for translation 109225. We always have on sight staff to translate as well and assist. The school will use the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit in order to will provide language assistance to LEP parents who speak a 2018-19 CEP 73  IEP Daily/Weekly during the school year. non-covered language or a language not spoken by school personnel. IEP Meetings are conducted on a daily basis. IEP Coordinator always advises for each required IEP meeting to have translation services. IEP Coordinator works with our schedules and if an on-site staff member cannot provide the services, IEP Coordinator calls the translation number. The school will use the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit in order to will provide language assistance to LEP parents who speak a non-covered language or a language not spoken by school personnel. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school sends out back-packed letters that are approved first by Administration and then distributed to each student during the school day (particularly during 3rd or 8th period). We also notify parents on a phone and e-mail distribution that translates the messages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All Staff Members are informed during monthly and weekly meetings that occur at TAPCo. Administration that Translation services are available either with in-house staff or with the over the phone translation line. Each TAPCo. Staff is given a copy of the over the phone translation number, code and school code on the blank LAC Forms that were distributed at our LAC meetings during the 2017-2018 school year. During the start of each school year, parent-teacher conferences and any other scheduled meeting that if translation services are required they will obtain the information from LAC Coordinator/Parent Coordinator Roque Bonilla. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 74  In addition to the above, we provide parent visitors to the Main Office a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Translated versions of this document, in the covered languages. We also post near our primary entrance a sign in each of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. Our school’s safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Survey is used to assess how effective the school is at meeting the needs of all parents including those parents that speak a language other then English in the home. Parent Coordinator is aware and knows which families require additional language assistance. Assistance is always provided and coordinated to provide parents with a comfortable environment to receive translation services. 2018-19 CEP 75 
