2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 10X226 P.S. 226 Principal: GLORIA DARDEN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 226X – The Nadia J. Pagan School 10X226 School Number (DBN): 321000010226 Pk-5 th Grade 1950 Sedgwick Avenue, Bronx NY 10453 929-452-3090 Phone Number: 929-452-3095 Fax: Gloria Darden gdarden@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Gloria Darden Grace Mancuso Maria Villalobos Maria Villalobos Joel Nieves TBD District Information Geographical District: 10 MaribelTorres-Hulla Superintendent: One Fordham Plaza, Bronx NY 10458 Superintendent’s Office Address: mhulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx NY 10462 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gloria Darden Grace Mancuso (DesigneePatricia Lozada) MariaVillalobos N/A Joel Nieves N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Claudette Smith Rosanna Hernandez Geraldine DeHaugoubart Member/ Staff Member Member/ Staff Member Member/ Staff Member 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Martha Herrera Jenny Paredes Eunice Leonardo N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school mission is as follows: P.S. 226 Mission Statement At P.S. 226, it is our mission, in partnership with parents and the community; to foster a safe, respectful, and engaging environment. An environment that not only allows for students to participate in a rigorous standards based 2018-19 CEP 9  curriculum, that fosters critical thinking, independence and success; but supports the whole child including their social and emotional well-being. P.S. 226 Vision Statement It is our vision of Public School 226, The Nadia J. Pagan school, in partnership with parents and community to empower each student to reach high standards to achieve academic success for lifelong learning. We are committed to fostering an attitude of caring with respect for self, others, and the environment. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At PS 226, teachers are given the opportunity to work collaboratively on Tuesdays to look at student work through a structured inquiry block utilizing a selected protocol - Learning from Student Work. This protocol was one of 6 protocols that was looked at as a staff. Teachers and staff voted on their preferred protocol, and the Learning from Student Work was selected. The PLC in collaboration with the school administrative team has reviewed the school needs assessment data to determine areas of need for professional development in order to support teachers in their instructional practice. Professional development is given to staff for 80 minutes every Monday. Teachers are given 40 minutes of time on Tuesdays to meet with or call parents and/or hold workshops to support parents understanding of important educational topics identified by each grade level team. This year we will conduct 6 week cycles of PD around Culturally Responsive Teaching, the Danielson Framework, Supporting ENL Students Mathematical Concepts, The Gradual Release of Responsibility, and Social Emotion Learning and Support. P.S. 226 has also developed partnerships with the community to deepen both instructional practices and to foster social and emotional development for students through programs such as: Chess in the Schools, Enrichment, and Dream Yard. Enriching students educational experience through the arts, including: poetry, dance, choir, cooking, photography, DJ Club, and theater arts. PS 226 is committed to providing the fundamentals for effective technology education in our school building. These fundamentals may include but are not limited to: ● Building and communicating a shared, community-based vision that prepares students to live and work in the 21st century. ● Creating powerful learning environments/classrooms using research-based strategies that effectively use technology. • Effectively integrating information and technology literacy standards into all areas of the school curriculum through a collaborative model. (inter-visitations) • Providing ongoing professional development for all staff in order to achieve effective teaching and learning practices. ● Adequate funding to ensure adequate technology resources. • Access to the most up to date technology for all students, staff, and community members. School Strengths/Accomplishments: ● Structure and a methodology of best teaching practices through the Gradual Release of Responsibility and inquiry based learning in mathematics as well as beginning to implement STEM - Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics plan. 2018-19 CEP 10  ● Pedagogy is based on a research based framework – The Danielson Framework ● Teachers collaborate on and across grade levels, which include out of classroom teachers and other personnel such as SETTS, RTI, SPEECH, and ENL providers. ● We have a common core aligned curriculum in both literacy through the establishment of a home grown curriculum and the Eureka mathematics program. ● The implementation of accountable talk is something that all classrooms utilize to foster discussion among students. ● Teachers analyze and triangulate data from student work products, in house benchmark and end of unit assessments, and state testing data to identify areas of strengths and areas of weaknesses. ● Teachers set goals for students in reading and mathematics based on areas identified in the data as weaknesses. ● Rubrics in literacy are common core aligned and embedded in the units of study. ● P.S. 226 also has developed partnerships with the community to deepen both instructional practices and to foster social and emotional development for students through programs such as: Japanese Arts, DREAM YARD creative arts program (poetry, chorus, dance, and theater), Chess in the Schools, and after school enrichment programs noted above. Additionally, teachers build partnerships with parents on Tuesdays for scheduled workshops that have been developed to support families with academics outside of the classroom. ● P.S. 226 invites parents into the school building monthly to celebrate student success through our Student of the Month, Student of the Grade, Principal Honor Roll, Assistant Principal Honor Roll, and Attendance Breakfast, and end of year in-class award ceremonies to recognize all students achievements. ● We have a strong student council that supports events and represents the school through a unified voice. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have a population of approximately 455 students. 26.43% of these students are ENL students. And 15.2% of the SWDs. Statistically, we have few ENL and SWDs who are meeting academic grade level standards. Our classrooms are comprised of both transitional bilingual K-5 with students receiving a variation of instruction in English dependent upon their NYSESLAT data. We have self contained 12-1 classes and ICT classrooms on select grade levels as well as a Dual Language pre-kindergarten. Students in these subgroups are by majority level 1 and will receive RTI small group support as well as after-school and Saturday Academy academic enrichment programs to support students in closing achievement gaps in their education. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In reference to the Framework for Great Schools report, two areas where we have shown growth are: Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers. We increased from 3.32 to 3.74 in the area of rigorous instruction and from 3.21 to 3.49 in the area of collaborative teachers. Two areas where we scored low of which will be a focus point for our school are strong family ties and relational trust. To leverage these areas, we have built time into our schedule to build family ties during our parent Tuesdays by offering workshops that are aligned to specific topics to support parents in understanding the standards and how they can support their children at home. Parents are invited to celebrations, and included on classroom functions as well as school trips. Parents are informed monthly by newsletters from each grade level of the focus of the work they will be engaging in for the month. 2018-19 CEP 11  In the area of relational trust as a school we have collectively developed our mission and vision so that there is a clear understanding across the building and within the school community of the work that we are engaging in and its purpose. With the support of teacher leaders we are bridging the gap in the area of communication and have a focus on building leadership capacity in the building, giving voice to staff members to have a say. In addition we have a new teacher academy led by one of our LEAD teachers. Our lead teachers are here to support teachers in building their instructional practice. Additionally, we, as a school, have in collaboration created a school charter called PACCC - Passion - Acknowledged - Comfortable - Collaborative - Committed. As a school we have identified in alignment with the Framework for Great Schools these terms as areas in which we will agree to hold one another to being. If we are being this and taking the actions of fulfilling this charter we will have an enriched school culture where teachers, students, and the community feel supported and collaborative. School Challenges: ● Additional professional development is needed for teachers of special needs students around individualized education plans and how to meet the needs of students with both significant gaps in academic achievement as well as social/emotional development. ● Teachers and paraprofessionals in both self contained and ICT settings to attend professional development in effort to enhance collaboration in partnership to support students in the classroom around both social and academic needs. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X226 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 478 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 56 49 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 33 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 93.7% % Reduced Lunch 24.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 77.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.1 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 29.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 75% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 17 18 92.4% 2.9% 16.7% 21.8% 0.4% 0.6% 4 9% 7.7 23.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS: ● In accordance with ELA state test data from our NYSED School Report Card, we have increased our ELA scores by 14.1%. NEEDS: ● In accordance with the ELA state test data from our NYSED School Report Card, only 1% of IEP and ENL students on average have met performance grade level standards in ELA. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 P.S. 226 will move ELA proficiency scores by 5% by increasing students ability to refer back to key ideas and details when discussing or writing about text. Teachers will provide daily shared, guided, and reading response opportunities in complex and independent leveled text. Progress will be measured by the April 2019 NY State ELA Test Scores. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students will work in leveled guided reading groups with teacher support. Students will be exposed to complex text through shared reading. Students in grades: K-5 We will work with grade/teacher leaders whose Instructional Methodology will provide teachers with on-site coaching and inter-visitations in the area of planning and delivery of instruction. After school will have a strategic focus and emphasis on the particular standards of need where academic achievement gaps have been identified. Expectations around referring back to the text to find key ideas and details. This will be evidenced in lesson plans. All classroom teachers -ELLS -IEP -Level 1 & 2 Students September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Admin, students, teachers Teacher Leaders/ Admin/ Students/ Teachers/ Admin Reciprocal teaching is being implemented in alignment with the districts initiative as well as culturally responsive teaching to support students in their literacy skills. Our ENL classes have been reduced in class size in comparison to past years in order to support the needs of students and strengthen students abilities in both their native and English languages in ELA. Additionally ENL students will partake in the Title III program with a focus in the area of literacy, improving students scores in the area of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Our students with IEPs in grades K-2 are utilizing the National Geographic Reach program. This program supports vocabulary, reading and writing through content areas in a concrete approach. Students are exposed to scaffolds for essential skills and strategies in order to promote independence. 2018-19 CEP 15 Parents September 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, and Administration Parent Involvement – In addition to parent workshops by administration, teachers will lead parent workshops on a variety of topics that are designed from surveying parents and utilizing the feedback. Parents will be invited in every other Tuesday to learn new topics such as having meaningful conversations with their children around their school work and the expectations for students to include text evidence in their responses and discourse in the classroom in alignment to building college and career readiness. Progress reports (3 times a year) will include F&P information. Newsletters will be sent home each month to parents reflecting our instructional focus. Newsletters will be translated and posted on the school website. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided with monthly newsletters that outline the curriculum and strategies teachers are working on with students that include the instructional focus. Parents will be encouraged to come to workshops as a support to provide families with tangible ways that they can help their child at home. Those responsible are: Administration, Teachers, Guidance, Parent Coordinator, and Partnership Organizations Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resource: Title I Basic funds will be used for any after school training for teachers and admin to revamp and update curriculum unit plans. Instructional Resources: Teacher teams and administration will use additional outside resources such as Teacher’s College materials, Engage NY modules, and National Geographic Supplements. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 16  By February 2019 we will review students F&P scores and student mid-line writing samples utilizing the embedded rubric that is standards based to determine growth of students in both reading and writing. In student work samples we will listen to students ability to retell a story as a means of collecting information on students both cognitive and Meta-cognitive ability utilizing Fountas and Pinnell, and we will analyze students writing to see that it includes key ideas and details. By doing so we will be able to monitor the number of levels students have increased in their reading and writing ability. It is expected that students move at least 1 level by February in grades 3-5. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) F&P and mid-line writing will be utilized to assess student growth. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? STRENGTHS: * In accordance with the OORs data index for 2017-2018 we scored a level 4 in disciplinary action and EMS transport. We scored a level 3 in attendance and Superintendent suspensions. NEEDS: ● In accordance with the OORs data index for 2017-2018 we scored 2.25 in the overall OORs data index in comparison to the average score of the city of a 2.97. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will move our index of 2.25 in our OORs data to an index of 3.0 this will be evidenced in the 2018-2019 overall OORs data. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). After careful analysis of our school multi-tiered student support and SEAT data we will put together action plans for students who are identified as tier II and/or tier III behavioral at risk. These students will be looked at and systems will be put into place in collaboration with Turnaround for Children as well as NY Foundling, our social emotional support liaison, and guidance to support students in building new strategies for maintaining their behavior. Staff will utilize strategies from Responsive Classroom in addition to tools developed in collaboration with Turnaround for Children with the inclusion of RULER (Recognizing, Understanding, Labeling, Expressing, and Regulating). Students will be acknowledged in the following ways in effort to support students’ social/emotional needs in order to grow academically: A.P./Principal Honor Roll, Student of the grade/month, perfect attendance ceremony, gotchya cards, student of the week, in class-ceremonies with families, and social/ emotional fun Fridays. Additionally, students will receive shout-outs on grade level curriculum boards. Students will be identified through monthly analysis of data. In grades pre-k to 5th - weekly certificate awards are displayed on the classroom doors and shared with families. Tier II and Tier III students will be supported in the following ways: Short-term counseling, skills groups, parent supports, home-base outreach with mental health support specialists, check-in support with guidance and our social/emotional support liaison. Additionally this year we will partner with Play Works, teaching students how to work together cooperatively, engaging students in team building, understanding sportsmanship in becoming Junior Coaches. In building a collaborative and trusting relationship with families, we will implement workshops specifically designed to support parents with students who exhibit struggling behaviors and offer services. Parents of students who have been identified as tier II and III will have access to the following resources: family psycho therapy, complex care, case management, psychiatric Parents September 2018 to June 2019 2018-19 CEP 19 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Whole School September 2018 to June 2019 Students September 2018 to June 2019 Students - Tier II & Tier III September 2018 to June 2019 Crisis Intervention Committee (Turnaround for Children and NY Foundling, classroom teachers, guidance, crisis-para, professionals, and Assistant Principals) Teachers, administration, guidance, Turnaround for Children, Mental Health Partners, Social-emotion support liaison, guidance, parents, and students Teachers, administration, guidance, Turnaround for Children, Mental Health Partners, Social-emotion support liaison, Play Works, guidance, parents, and students Classroom teachers, guidance, crisis-para, Administration, Social/emotional support liaison, and assessment, medication management, and home-based outreach. mental health partners 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We have monthly parent workshop as outlined above that are conducted by the classroom teachers. Workshops are given monthly and additionally the Parent Coordinator has monthly workshops from outside organizations. Those responsible are: Administration, Teachers, Guidance, Parent Coordinator, and Partnership Organizations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources/Scheduling/Resources: A school social/emotional committee will be formed and time will be allocated to the school schedule for the committee to meet. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will review the School Wide Environmental Assessment Tool - SEAT - , Class, and Multi-tiered support system data provided from Turnaround for Children and OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Wide Environmental Assessment Tool - SEAT/MTSS - multi-tiered support system/OORS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS ● According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review Report we are proficient in the areas of 1.4 - Maintaining a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. And 3.4 - Establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. NEEDS:  According to the Framework for Great Schools quality guide 2017-2018 - 65% of teachers say that teachers take responsibility for improving the school compared to the district of 80%. 68% of teachers say that other teachers agree to try new ideas as compared to the district at 77%. In order to increase these percentages to the district average we will work within our school building to identify best practices and take select teachers to observe, using our teacher leaders to their capacity to best support the staff. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will increase from 65% to 80% in the area of collective responsibility as evidenced by the Framework for Great Schools 2018 report. This will be made evident in the Framework for Great Schools 2019 report. It will also be monitored by grade level and committee meeting agendas & attendance. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The use of monthly grade-level meeting templates (to show the monitoring of data and lesson planning as well as next steps for meeting the needs of students), student self-assessments (grades 1-5), and student learning goals. All teachers and students September 2018 – June 2019 All Teachers, and Administration Additionally: **Teachers will do inquiry work through the use of the Learning from Student Work protocol that the staff voted on as the preferred protocol for analyzing student work. Teachers and staff will meet some Tuesday afternoons from 3:10 p.m. – 3:40 p.m. to engage in this inquiry process. Teachers will review student work samples to assess whether or not strategies developed with the inquiry team worked. Teachers will use the learning from student work protocol selected by the school to look at student work in conjunction to reading material. Teachers will rotate between leadership roles within their grade level inquiry teams every two weeks. In each two week period, the presenter will present the first week and collect ideas/strategies from their team members to implement in the classroom in effort to close achievement gaps and goals set around those achievement gaps. Teachers will have a two week time period to put these strategies into practice and will then discuss the successes and challenges of their implementation with their team members. Teachers will work collaboratively to review data, analyze student work samples, create goals, research, and brainstorm strategies for supporting students. Teachers will complete an Online template around their work monthly. Teachers will have monthly meetings where they share out their findings around the inquiry work as to create cohesion and discussion across grade levels. Teachers and students September 2018 – June 2019 All Teachers, and Administration Parents will be informed during our School Leadership Team meetings of the work that is taking place to meet the needs of students. Inquiry outcomes will be discussed at these meetings. Parents October 2018 – June 2019 Parents, teachers, administration, and staff members In building trust, teachers and staff will create together the norms for looking at student work. Teachers and staff will Teachers, Staff members, and Administration September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Staff members, and Administration 2018-19 CEP 22 collaborate and articulate the needs of students in a relaxed setting. Professional development will be given to support teachers in working collaboratively. A new teacher academy is in place and run by one of our teacher leaders to support new teachers in classroom management, best instructional practices, and the Danielson Framework. Grade level common planning preps have been scheduled and teachers will meet weekly on Mondays for professional development where they will engage in activities that foster collaboration. We will conduct 6 week cycles to support all staff members in the areas of social emotional learning and support, the gradual release of responsibility, advanced literacy and supporting ENL students in the area of mathematics, and culturally responsive teaching. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Professional learning committee calendars monthly workshops for parents. Teachers utilize parent Tuesdays and preparation periods to meet with families in effort to support families by providing strategies and having academic conversations. Those responsible are: Administration, Teachers, Guidance, Parent Coordinator, and Partnership Organizations Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teacher teams, and admin will be provided with professional development time and will be allotted time to look at student work and plan next steps to improve student achievement in writing. \ Instructional Resources: Title I funds have been allocated for the use of professional learning material to guide our inquiry process as well as other materials. Scheduling: Common planning is built into the schedules. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 23  By February 2019, an internal survey/rubric will be conducted where teachers will rate their participation in grade level meetings, inquiry, professional development, and school committees. This survey will be reviewed by the School Leadership Team (SLT). We will also provide an opportunity for teachers and staff to share their experience, and make suggestions for increasing participation among staff. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Grade level agendas (with roles), committee meeting agendas, professional development agendas, and inquiry agendas with signature pages. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS: ● Effective School Leadership as referenced by the Framework for Great Schools Report (2018): we scored a 4.0 * In the framework for great schools quality guide report 95% of parents agreed that we are an inclusive leadership team. This is compared to the city average of 94%. * In order accordance with our 2017-2018 quality review, we are well developed in the area of 4.1 Observing teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. NEEDS: ● Effective School Leadership as referenced by the Framework for Great Schools Report (2018): Instructional leadership we scored a 79% out of the district average of 88%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will move from 79% to 88% in instructional leadership (Framework for Great Schools Data 2018). This will be evidenced within the Framework for Great Schools quality guide (2019). 2018-19 CEP 25 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers and administration Teachers and Students September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers and administration Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 100% of teachers will have received at least four ADVANCE feedback (except for highly effective teachers who chose option 4) reports and at least one informal feedback non-advance reports in order to support new teachers to become effective and highly effective in their teaching practice in alignment with the Danielson Framework. Teachers who are chosen for leadership positions will be selected through exhibiting effective instructional practices. Teachers will receive professional development around questioning and discussion and assessment to support all students including ENLs and students with special needs. This professional development will support students in nature of supporting teachers in being effective in their instructional practices. Teachers will engage in lab-sites and individual coaching sessions in order to further develop instructional practices. Teachers will participate in a learning walk during the school year and inter-visitations to showcase schools and other schools deemed as having best practices within the district. At that time teachers will have the opportunity to visit various classrooms across grade levels to take low-inference notes on classroom instruction. Teachers then have the opportunity to align and code the notes to the Danielson Framework and then rate the teachers practices. Data is collected across all teams within the learning walk to get a picture of instructional practice across the school. Data will be analyzed as a whole staff and we will look at trends of teacher practice in accordance with the Danielson Framework bi-monthly. 2018-19 CEP 26  Teachers will engage in 6 week sessions around the following PD training opportunities - social emotional learning and support, culturally responsive teaching, gradual release of responsibility, and advance literacy and supporting ENL students in the area of mathematics. Teachers will be engaged in inquiry PD on some Tuesdays where they will utilize the learning from student work protocol and look at student work samples. Teachers will work in collaboration and brainstorm strategies to support one another to support students who are ENL and SWDs. It is expected that by improving teacher practice in 1a, 1e, 3b, 3c, and 3d of the Danielson framework, we will close student achievement gaps. Data will be reviewed monthly with teachers and adjustments to curricula will be made to support students. Programs will be launched to support the needs of students based on this data. Lead teachers will support with the recruitment of teachers to participate on committees. Teachers will receive e-mails with digital sign-up sheets to participate in committees. In addition to leadership programs, informal leaders/teachers will be selected to participate in the school hiring committee. The School Leadership Team will discuss ways in which we can increase teacher participation and will provide administration with feedback as to how we can support teachers professional growth. Teachers will receive both advance and non-advance feedback that is informal via e-mail and/or verbal to further support the growth in their instructional practice, which will heighten the rapport and trust between the staff and administration. Teachers will meet with administration in October and February for goal setting, to identify 2 professional goals aligned to their Danielson data where they need to grow in their practice as well as a goal for literacy and mathematics that is coherent with their student data. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents and Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers and administration Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers and administration 2018-19 CEP 27  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be outreached via the school website, flyer, phone messenger, and phone calls by the Parent Coordinator on behalf of the administrative team monthly to attend workshops. Those responsible are: Administration, Teachers, Guidance, Parent Coordinator, and Partnership Organizations. This year our PA President will be taking the seat of the School Leadership Team Chairperson. Additionally parents of our ENL students will be invited in to work with students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Funding will be utilized for teachers and staff for professional development training as well as time spent for administration to analyze the data from ADVANCE and plan next steps for supporting teachers around their instructional practices and coordinate committees and other distributive leadership opportunities. Scheduling: Per-session funds will be allocated for committees listed above to take place after school hours and/or to send teachers out for professional development training. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we expect to see an increase of at least 8 classroom teachers involved in school-wide decision making through shared leadership. This will be monitored by sign-up and attendance on school-wide committees. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE data will be utilized to track teachers progress in their professional growth, with a focus in the area of 4e. Administration will meet with teachers in October and February to monitor both teacher professional goals and student goals that will be tied to student data. SEAT data will also be used to identify the number of teachers/staff that are involved in making school wide decisions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS ● In accordance with the 2017-2018 Quality Review - we are proficient in the area of - 3.4 Establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations NEEDS: * We need to increase teacher outreach to parents from 89% (2.80) to 94% (district average) as referenced by the Framework for Great Schools (2018). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase teacher outreach to parents from 89% to 94% (district average) as referenced by the Framework for Great Schools quality guide (2018). This will be evidenced by the Framework for Great Schools 2019 report. 2018-19 CEP 29 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, administration, and the parent coordinator. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In terms of structures, parent workshops will be mapped out and letters will be sent home monthly with the topic of the workshop being held by each grade level team in effort to further support the school’s initiative to engage in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that students’ strengths and needs are addressed. Parents will be invited in for a testing and strategy information workshop. This 2 hour workshop will consist of grade levels putting together valuable information for parents/families to support their children at home. It will also include a presentation on the common core learning standards in relation to the NY state ELA and MATH tests. A number of additional workshops will be conducted for parents throughout the school year by our Parent Coordinator and family support personnel to enhance and deepen understanding of academic, behavioral, and social-emotional needs. Parents will be invited twice a year to partake in a school learning walk where they will have the opportunity to see students and teachers engaging in standards based curriculum. Monthly parents will be invited to come in to work with Clusters, to participate in a gym, art, music, or science activity with their child. 2018-19 CEP 30 Parents and Students September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, administration, and parent coordinator, Mental health partnership, parent association. NY Foundling Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, administration, and the parent coordinator, and parents. In Kindergarten and 1st grade students will do STEAM activities on Fridays where parents will be invited to come in and support and work with their child. Some workshops for parents will be around supporting Parents of ENL, Special Ed, and other high needs students so that parents can better assist their children at home, such as homework support, building and maintaining friendships, and building coping skills within the school building and community. Additionally, our mental health partnership personnel will share information with families as to how they can best support their children with any emotional needs (NY Foundling). Our Parent Association will also provide workshops to support the community around various topics related to supporting students both academically and with social/emotional needs. All grade levels will have held at least 10 parent workshops over the course of the school year for parents on a Tuesday as built into the school schedule. This will be evidenced by calendars from each grade level with the topic of the workshop, agendas, and parent signature pages from each event. This will be done by providing parent workshops that will be mapped out and letters will be sent home monthly with the topic of the workshop being held by each grade level team in effort to further support the school’s initiative to engage in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that students’ strengths and needs are addressed. To support parents who do not have child care, we are inviting parents to come with their children. Food and light refreshments will be provided to encourage and welcome our parent community into the building. For parents who are unable to attend, teachers will outreach and send home pertinent information from the workshops so that parents are made aware. Our School Leadership Team will discuss ways of encouraging parental involvement in the classroom, including having parents finger-printed so that they can volunteer and support in hands-on activities within the classroom including reading time with students. 2018-19 CEP 31 Letters will be translated in Spanish or other native languages (other languages will be translated through google-docs), parent Tuesdays will be in place for teachers to outreach, and our Parent Coordinator will support with parent outreach. Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, administration, and the parent coordinator. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Turn around for children, Morris Heights, the Parent Association, and other partnership organizations that work with our Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: The parent coordinator, administration, and teachers will plan workshops to provide parents with information as to how they can best support their child at home. Instructional Resources: Any materials/supplies for workshops will be purchased based on need and available funding. Scheduling: Time is built into the regular school day for workshops to be held on Tuesdays from 2:25 – 3:10 p.m. and/or after school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will utilize by February 2018 a survey/ rubric will be given to parents to rate themselves on their involvement on a scale of 1-4. Signature pages will also be monitored for parent functions on a monthly basis and develop graphs to show the number of parents who are attending workshops and classroom functions. We will look at attendance data on parent Tuesday and compile comparison data from last years parent workshops. Additionally we will look to see an increase in parental outreach within our 2019 School Quality Guide. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School wide calendar and newsletters to parents as well as agendas and signature sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 2017-2018NYS ELA Data for Cycle I and ELA Assessment Tool Scores for Cycle II. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ELA Assessment Tool/ Leveled Small Group & One-to-One Support During the Day Mathematics Science Social Studies 2017-2018NYS Math Data for Cycle I and scores for Cycle II - NYSMath State Scores 2017-2018NYS Science Data Engage NY Mathletics Amplify End of unit assessments embedded in Literacy Units of Study Vocabulary Development and Content Support 2018-19 CEP 33 Guided Reading Reciprocal Teaching Fundations Reading Rescue Orton Gillingham Rally materials National Geographic Strand-by-Strand Small Group Instruction Small Group Instruction After School, Title III, Saturday Academy, and February Break (3 days) intensive Guided Reading - Cluster push-in support During the Day After School Saturday Academy, and February Break (3 days) intensive, During the Day Science Academy – After School During the Day Whole Class with Educational Assistant to support content Small Group  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) OORs occurrence reports and logs of support At- Risk Counseling Behavioral and Social and Emotional Small Group During the Day Classroom Support One-to-one 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 5 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students will be provided with counseling and supplies. Each student will receive a book bag with uniform, notebooks, folders, and other basic school supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: DOE Sponsored Recruitment Fairs. Hiring committee to support the recruitment process. Retention: All new teachers are provided with mentors and receive support through administration. Teachers have built-in time in schedules to collaborate. New Teacher Academy monthly meetings. Assignments: Based on license area and/or school needs Support: All Staff Members are provided with on-going support weekly, out of school professional development training, meeting with administration to discuss professional goals and needs, taking staff needs surveys and/or feedback surveys from attended training(s) 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ELI (Executive Leadership Institute) – Provides PD for administration SDC (School Development Committee) Intervisitations/Labsites from highly effective teachers Weekly PD (Danielson Framework, Inquiry Vertical and Grade Level, ELL, and Quality Review) of which includes Paraprofessionals Teachers will be sent to district PDs, showcase schools, as well as participate in school learning walks, and see effective and highly effective teacher practice through inter-visitations. Teachers will have training on the Danielson Framework, have the opportunity to engage in low-inference note taking and coding with the rubric. Teachers will receive 80 minutes each Monday of PD with break out sessions depending on teacher need. New teachers will participate in a new teacher academy led by a LEAD teacher. 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parent meetings are held for all incoming Kindergarten students of which includes all Pre-Kindergarten parents Pre-K parent letter that is sent home monthly to inform parents of the curriculum and activities each month Our Pre-K teacher attends monthly PD around planning in order to align lesson planning to the CCLS Pre-K teacher also has a common planning time to meet with the Kindergarten teachers each week to discuss next steps for supporting students in the transition of Pre-K to Kindergarten. Parents are invited into the classroom monthly for end of unit celebrations and/or activities 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Staff Needs Assessment Survey will be conducted to gather information as to the specific areas of interest that teachers and staff members indicated they needed support in. Additionally, teachers are asked to complete a form after each workshop in order for administration to make informed decisions as to the next steps for continued teacher growth. Teachers receive an assessment calendar, which is discussed at grade meetings and is adjusted based on discussions. Teachers have been provided with a list of multiple committees such as data, lesson planning, social/emotional, safety, as well as others. Teachers had the opportunity to choose a committee of which they will be part of. This initiative build both leadership capacity amongst the staff members while engages them in the process of making school wide decisions in conjunction with our school leadership team. By doing so, staff members play a pivotal role in the decision making process. 2018-19 CEP 38  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5B 5A, 5D, 5E TBD 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 443,688 96,088 16,078 6,0009 2,802,509 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 2018-19 CEP 39   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 226, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 226 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. The school will maintain this information. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 42  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 226 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent 2018-19 CEP 43  Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 226 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  Providing the parents the opportunities to understand their child’s curriculum through workshops and meetings with teachers.  Supports parental involvement by encouraging meaningful participation in the life of the school through various activities.  Holding monthly PA meetings, SLT and all sub-committees of all these bodies, Parent Teacher conferences, Movie Night, orientation meeting for incoming Kindergarten families, workshops, and continuing the use of our parent resource center.  Notifying parents of upcoming events by: notices sent home regularly, Parent Bulletin Board, and our school website, www.ps226.org . In addition to the above-mentioned available parent meetings, the administration regularly distributes to every child all bulletins from the district in English and Spanish (as well as other languages needed to meet family needs) to take home to parents. The PA also prepares bulletins and informs parents of school activities for their children.  Additionally, mailings are conducted at various times. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. The school will maintain this information. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will:  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Schools Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact;  Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. Our parent coordinator meets with parents and supports teachers in translating documents and meetings when needed.  Parent Coordinator works in conjunction with the PA to plan parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; so that parents are aware of the standards their children need to meet.  Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 44   Invite parents to PA meetings to support them in the decision making process as well as keeping them aware of the initiatives of the Chancellor;  Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  Plan and invite parents to our September Meet The Teacher Night Encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee  Continue to improve our Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; to support parents with materials that help them support their child.  Encourage more parents to become trained school volunteers, such as Learning Leaders through the Region.  Provide written progress reports that are given at least twice per year to keep parents informed of their children’s progress  Develop monthly grade level newsletters, monthly calendar, and placing pertinent materials on the school web; I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 2018-19 CEP 46  ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Teacher Responsibilities: ● Parents and students will be provided with monthly newsletters to support their understanding of the content that students will be learning. ● The teacher will ensure that students are afforded consistent opportunities to actively engage in conversations within the classroom setting. ● Students will be given the opportunity to reflect on their academics and/or social well being, which include safety if necessary. ● Teachers will set academic goals with students based on current data across subject areas and students in grades 2-5 will learn to self-monitor their goals. ● Teachers will provide students with feedback on assignments daily, as well as monitor the progress of each individual student through the utilization of a checklist in mathematics through conferring with students in all other subject areas. ● Homework sheets will be signed off by parents to heighten the level of awareness as to what students are learning daily by-way also providing home-support to ensure that the work is completed. Homework sheets will also include key dates of activities and/or events. ● Parents and students will be provided with progress reports 3 times per year for grades K-2 and 2 times per year for grades 3-5. Parents will receive this information prior to formal report cards and parent conference meetings. Parents and students will be informed at the end of each math unit of the score that students received on the unit test. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48  2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale/Subgroups: The 2018-19 NYSESLAT data shows that a group of entering and emerging level students in grades 1-5 need support in the English Language Arts as a whole. Additionally, students with individualized education plans who are ELLs will be included as well as students with different language backgrounds: Urdu, Fulani, French and Spanish. Students who are in this subgroup will have additional services after school and Saturdays in the areas of reading, writing, listening and speaking depending on available funding. Schedule/Duration/Language: The program will run every Saturday from 9 to 1:30 beginning in November 11, 2018 and ending in March 17, 2019 a total of 250 hours of ENL support. Students will be grouped by English proficiency levels and grade band: grades 1-2, 3-4 and fifth graders. For the development of language and acceleration of literacy skills, this program will include three certified teachers: Ms. Montolio and Ms. Larrea (ENL teachers) and Ms. Ortega (Bilingual teacher). Academic instruction will be mainly on literacy- reading, writing, listening, speaking, and vocabulary development as well as reading in mathematics. Students will also receive after school on Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from 2:30 - 4:30 p.m. beginning November 11, 2018 and ending March 16, 2019. All instruction will be provided to students in English with ENL methodology. Students who are either entering or emerging according to NYSESLAT data will be placed in one group with Ms. Ortega 1-2, Ms. Montolio 3-4, and the other group with Ms. Larrea fifth graders.Common Core Aligned materials for the program will be purchased. To immerse students in rigorous academic instruction, we will be using Common Core aligned material - NYSESLAT practice books as well as reading materials to support listening and vocabulary development.All teachers are certified in ENL methodology and one is certified in Bilingual methodology. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development will be held the first week of November and there after will be conducted once a month on Wednesdays for one hour. Teachers will receive training on how to assess student listening through read alouds and passages that are Common Core aligned. Additionally, teachers will receive training on usage of the purchased materials, planning for students of ELLs, and ENL methodology including the SIOP model. Teachers will also learn strategies for teaching students to comprehend and understand the content of a text as well as teaching vocabulary development with visual supports. Teachers will also learn how to use the writing rubric to assess students writing needs. It will be as follows: 2018-19 CEP 51  Part C: Professional Development Topic: To discuss new information on the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) Rationale: To get more acquainted with new information on the NYSESLAT data as it aligns with the Common Core Learning Standards, and provide more language support to our ELL students in the four areas of literacy: Date: 11/08/18 Time: 2:30-3:30 P. M. Name of Providers: Ms. Montolio/Larrea, our ENL teachers will be providing PD to teachers. Audience: Bilingual and ENL Teachers Topic: The SIOP Model Rationale: To discuss in depth the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) Model and best support our planning and teaching practice to teach language and content matter. Date: 12/13/18 Time: 2:30-3:30 P. M. Name of Providers: Ms. Montolio/Larrea, our ENL teachers will be providing PD to teachers. Audience: Bilingual and ENL teachers Topic: Teaching Reading Comprehension Rationale: Based on our NYSESLAT data analysis and ELA test, our ELLs need more support in the areas of reading comprehension and vocabulary development. During this time, we will be discussing different reading strategies such as analyzing vocabulary in context and in isolation, reading for meaning through picture clues, and stressing the importance of utilizing high order thinking questions to facilitate comprehension. Date: 1/3/19 Time: 2:30-3:30 P. M. Name of Providers: Ms. Montolio/Larrea, our ENL teachers will be providing PD to teachers Audience: Bilingual and ENL teachers Topic: Analyzing student Work: Mid-LineRationale: To analyze student work based on mid-line results and discuss how to best support them in the area of writing. Additionally, we will further study the Gradual Release of Responsibility teaching model to support teachers and students. Date: 2/7/19Time: 2:30-3:30 P. M.Name of Providers: Ms. Montolio/Larrea, our ENL teachers.Topic: Teaching Listening Skills through the ContentRationale: How to use non-fiction texts to support students in acquaring content language and improve in the area of listening skills. Strategies for analyzing vocabulary and questions will be part of this PD. Date: 3/7/19Time: 2:30-3:30 P.M.Name of Providers: Ms. Montolio, our ENL Coordinator. Topic: The NYSESLAT Targets of Measure (TOM) for writing Rationale: how to utilize the TOM to measure students writing end line assessment and know next steps for the different English proficiency levels. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 52  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Teacher (Yesenia Ortega- Bilingual/ENL Certified) will engage parents in different activities around ENL: Parent workshops will take place from 3:30 - 4:30 p.m. every other Thursday. Teacher will focus on: Topic: Knowledge of the NYSESLAT Test Rationale: Parents will be able to get more familiar with this type of language assessment in order for them to provide extrat support at home. During the meeting, we will be discussing the NYSESLAT Test rubrics for the different grade levels as well as the areas in which students need to focus on. Date: 11/23/18 Time: 3:30-4:30 Name of Provider: Yesenia Ortega - Bilingual certified Audience: Parents of ELL students How Parents will be notified: our Parent Coordinator, Mr. Vargas will be involved by creating parent letters/phone calls to reach out Topic: Supporting parents with the Common Core Learning Standards Rationale: With the new shifts in literacy development, parents will be supported in understanding the standards and the language through the internet. We will discuss students' work and how it aligns to the new standards in order to increase high expectations. Date: 12/7/18 Time: 3:30-4:30 Name of Provider: Yesenia Ortega - Bilingual certified Audience: Parents of ELL students How Parents will be notified: our Parent Coordinator, Mr. Vargas will be involved in assisting the program by creating letters for parents/phone calls to reach out Topic: How to support students at home in reading, writing, and homework Rationale: To provide parents with reading and writing strategies and support homework in these two areas. Additionally, most of our students need to continue reading and writing at home. At this workshop, parents are going to be able to go over the homework sheet and discuss high quality work that aligns to the Common Core Learning Standards. Date: 12/21/18 Time: 3:30-4:30 Name of Provider: Yesenia Ortega - Bilingual certified Audience: Parents of ELL studentsHow Parents will be notified: our Parent Coordinator, Mr. Vargas will be involved in assisting the program by creating letters for parents/phone calls to reach out Topic: DOE WebsiteRationale: To have parents more involved in getting to know which resources are available to them through the DOE in order for them to support at home. Date: 1/4/19Time: 3:30-4:30Name of Provider: Yesenia Ortega - Bilingual certifiedAudience: Parents of ELL students How Parents will be notified: our Parent Coordinator, Mr. Vargas will assist the program by creating parent letters/phone calls to reach outTopic: NYSESLAT Listening StrandRationale: To create higher expectations for the area of listening for the school year 2016-2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 2017 test.Date: 1/18/19Time: 3:30-4:30 P.M.Name of Provider: Yesian Ortega - Bilingual certifiedAudience: Parents of ELL students How Parents will be notified: our Parent Coordinator, Mr. Vargas will assist the program by creating parent letters/phone calls to reach outTopic: NYSESLAT Reading StrandRationale: To discuss reading strategies for vocabulary development and increase reading comprehension.Date: 2/1/19Time: 3:30-4:30 P.M.Name of Provider: Yesenia Ortega - Bilingual certifiedAudience: Parents of ELL students How Parents will be notified: our Parent Coordinator, Mr. Vargas will assist the program by creating parent letters/phone calls to reach outTopic: NYSESLAT Writing StrandRationale: To implement strategies for writing better sentence structures and how to address the writing prompt.Date: 2/15/19Time: 3:30-4:30 P.M.Name of Provider: Yesenia Ortega - Bilingual certifiedAudience: Parents of ELL students How Parents will be notified: our Parent Coordinator, Mr. Vargas will inform parents via school messenger, flyers sent home. Topic: Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT Rationale: To discuss expectations for the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test. Parents will be able to get familiar with strategies for the different strands of the NYSESLAT. Date: 3/1/19 Time: 3:30-4:30 P. M. Name of Provider: Yesenia Ortega-Bilingual certifiedHow Parents will be notified: our Parent Coordinator, Edwin Vargas will inform parents of these activities via: School messenger, parent bulletin board, school website, and flyers home. All information will be translated in Spanish for parents. Additionally, information disseminated to parents during the PD will be translated in Spanish as well. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 13,289.00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, $0 $0 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $450 - Secretary Per -Session $1,500 - Supervisor Per -Session $11,339 - Teacher Per-Session 2018-19 CEP 54  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 13,289.00 13,289.00 2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name The Nadia Pagan J. School Borough Bronx School Number 226 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Gloria Darden Coach Ms. Allison ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kilsia Montolio Teacher/Subject Area Enid Echevarria Teacher/Subject Area TBD Related-Service Provider Ms. Sparano Superintendent Maribel Hulla Torres Assistant Principal Danielle Jawski, Doug Manzella Coach Ms. Hunte, Universal Lit School Counselor Ms. Matos Parent Maria Villalobos Parent Coordinator Edwin Vargas Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 483 2018-19 CEP 56 Total number of ELLs 130 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 26.92%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 3 10 4 10 K 16 1 18 2 11 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 18 11 10 10 16 5 10 0 10 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 75 0 0 0 0 0 75 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: To assess early literacy skills for our ELLs in Spanish and English, we utilize Fountas and Pinnell (The Continuum of Literacy Learning) for grades K-5. The literacy components of this assessment reading program are interactive read aloud, shared reading, writing about reading, technological communication, phonics, spelling, word study, and guided reading. As a school, we monitor very closely our students literacy progress. Part of this process entails setting specific reading goals for our ELL students. Therefore, as a school, we have create a system data template in Google docs, so that our teachers can have access to the reading and writing level of the students. Additonally, the Fountas and Pinnell reading formal and informal running records can be viewed and analyzed in Google docs. This data analysis is done three times a year and it is analyzed to help us drive instruction (e.g. if the student is intensive (level 1), strategic (level 2), on level (level 3), and above level (level 4). As a result, we were able to notice that most students met their goals or moved at least three reading levels. In addition, we were able to use this Fountas and Pinnel reading data to set new goals and plan for further 2018-19 CEP 57  differentiated lessons. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our literacy block is 150 minutes of instruction to ensure that students are appriopriately serviced and equipped with the strategies needed to support reading comprehension and language development. Within this block, the teacher incorporates read alouds, shared reading and guided reading to support students learning the new and home language. During read alouds, students are engaged in listening to the language and the vocabulary that is modeled from the teacher. In addition, the teacher makes a lot of language clarifications to create to increase comprehensible input and higher expectations. Discussion and questioning techniques are embedded into this block, which are also supported by language frames and prompts. Shared reading is implemented to model the structure of the new language and the reading strategies students need to move to the next level. Teachers provide students with a clear reading focus, in which students practice the reading strategies as whole group and then move into small group instruction. In small group instruction, teachers differentiate the strategies according to the reading levels of the students as well as the English language proficiency levels. Groups are flexible in order to provide students with the opportunity to meet other academic needs and benefit from other strategies in reading, writing and math. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: To provide our school with continuity of instruction in reading, we provide teachers with benchmark levels according to Common Core Learning Standards. When students are assessed, we implement baseline, mid-line and endline to measure language and content. Additionally, in reading we utilize the Fountas & Pinnel assessment to measure the benchmark levels three times per year. Based on the results, we provide information to parents to support their children in reading at home. Also, teachers utilize this information to provide more support with individualized instruction. When students are not meeting benchmark levels, teachers regroup students to strategize instructions and also receive Response to Intervention (RTI). Instruction in the area of math is 70 minutes of inquiry based lesson, which incorporates a math word problem question, allowing students explore for about 15 minutes and share with a partner the different strategies they use. Direct instruction from the teacher is also part of the math block, such as explaining the strategy. As they work together, students have the opportunity to revise their thinking and share their new findings. In math, we utilize Go Math end-of-unit assessments to check mastery of concepts and skills. The benchmark levels for this assessment are "Below, Approaching, at Benchmark and Enrichment". Students who are below or approaching levels of this math assessment receive extra support through small group instruction. The New York Performance Tasks, Measure of Students Learning (MOSL) is administered twice a year: in the Fall and in the Spring. During the administration of this assessment, our bilingual students have the option of responding to the questions in Spanish or English. As we gather this writing data, we notice that our students need more support with the structure of the English language. Therefore, we are providing more professional development in the areas of reading and writing related to ENL methodology and instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, we provide a number of academic interventions in the following areas: The literay data is utilized to drive instruction in reading and writing and to form groups in the classroom (Tier 1) according to levels and skills. The curriculum and lessons are further revisited with our literacy coach, Ms. Allison, to re-teach areas of needs. Literacy centers are created as a result our reading, writing and math summative assessments. These centers include main idea, phonemic awareness, sight words, story telling, senquencing, fluency building, math facts, number sequencing, etc. Progress reports are sent home to parents. Students who need more support are then refer to our Response to Intervention Team (RTI). Parent Tuesday time is also alloted for parents to come and discuss progress and next steps. At these meetings teachers share the plan of action, in which parents are also informed about what the data reveals about their child, the program to meet their needs and for how long the interventation will be implemented. We strongly recommend parents 2018-19 CEP 58  to participate in workshops to support students at home as well as making recommendations for them to have their children participate in our After School. Program and resources implemented as an academic intervention are also evaluated to determine effective instruction and support. Math data is collected at the end of each unit. Information on this math data is sent to parents with the level of the students and to inform them about next steps. In addition, the end of the unit data and student's level is included on the progress report. Students who are performing below grade level are part of our small group instruction and inquiry. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: To ensure that all students, including academically at-risk ELLs, receive rigorous instruction and that their needs are met. We follow the protocol according to the Response to Intervention Model For ELLs with a 6-8 of support. the RTI Model is designed to: determine whether students are benefiting from an instructional program within a reasonable time; build more effective instructional programs for students who are not benefiting; compare the efficacy of different forms of instruction; design more effective, individualized instructional programs; reduce inappropriate referral rate; increase educational opportunities for linguistically and culturally diverse populations. To continue meeting our ELL population specific needs when implementing the RTI model, we take into consideration the home and the new language proficiency levels, including their educational background, socioeconimic status, and an assessment of classroom instruction and resources. The process of the RTI Model at P. S. 226 consists in identifying those students that are struggling in the classroom (Tier 1) and provide them with interventions that will address the different academic areas, language support, monitor progress and help them succeed at school in all aspects. Our RTI is based on the following three-tiered model:. Provide students with an assessment at the beginning of the year (baseline writing, reading and math assessments) and implement high quality instruction in the classroom.. Provide small group instruction (Ms. Seemen, and Ms. Rella), increase instructional time (6-8 weeks) and monitor progress.. Increase the support through individualized instruction and involve parents in the process by providing them with the skills in reading strategies, homework support. All of these steps are in place at P. S. 226 for effective prevention to referrals to Special Education and to support academically at-risk ELLs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Paste response to question here: As we administer early in June the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL), the data reveals that our students show a great understanding of vocabulary development: students can identify vocabulary in context and follow prompts. In the area of speaking, we are noticing that they need more support with oral skills and the structure of the English language (verbs, pronouns, specific grammar instruction). As a result, we will increase the implementation of cloze activities in which students can be able to predict and learn the structure to the English language related to the content. P.S. 226 is implementing rigorous ENL methodology and skills related to the Common Core Learning Standards to address the needs of our ELL population such as revising ENL strategies according to the language proficiency level of the student, revisiting the ELL curriculum, and evaluating classroom resources. To annually evaluate our ELL population, we utilize the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) data results in listening, speaking, reading, and writing to accommodate student’s language needs, develop instructional lessons, and utilize the English proficiency levels to determine the mandated units of service students need to be provided with as it is stated by CR Part 154.2. At P. S. 226, part of our on-going assessment process is to implement the NYSESLAT practice test, which is done as an interim school wide test to find out more in depth our student’s language skills and performance to determine further academic intervention services we need to address ( strengths and weaknesses of the students we serve). The main focus of our school is to also use the results from this assessment from ATS (RLAT) to drive instruction and plan to teach content and language according the modalities. In addition, we utilize the City Wide Mid-year Interim Periodic NYSESLAT assessment test results and the combined modalities (listening/speaking, reading/writing) to align instructional ELL intervention services as well as for grouping and differentiate instruction. Our Supplemental Program for our 2018-19 CEP 59  ELL students are focused around the NYSESLAT Modalities to determine areas of instructional support. Students that scored at a lower level in the new language based on the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT, were supplemented with Smarty Ant, Roseta Stone Technology Software and Ready Gen suplemental reading program to support the areas of reading and listening skills. Patterns and trends across the different modality levels of the NYSESLAT test also reveals that a high percentage of our students in the upper grades moved at least one level of proficiency of the English language in the areas of reading and writing Our former ELL data shows that 38 students out of 112 tested, need more support with test taking strategies in the areas of math, and ELA. Our first grade and third grade NYSESLAT data also show that in the area of speaking, students oral skills improved as well as in the area of writing. Teachers will continue implementing ENL methodology and instructional resources that will further support our students in moving to level of commanding. Through the ELL Periodic Assessment, we will be able to focus on the strengths and weaknesses to further support our ELL population in the literacy skills of the NYSESLAT test. In the area of writing, students will learn the strategies that will help them to learn the structure of the English language and to help them become independent writers. To make adjustments to our curriculum unit, we will revisit the ENL support and the strategies that need to be implemented according the NYSESLAT data modalities. Further data analysis will include the Fountas and Pinnel reading data and the Measure of Student Learning (MOSL). Consistently, teachers will model these language skills by analyzing children’s writing samples, and at the same time making good use of the writing rubrics, standards and performance indicators. In addition, the NYSESLAT modality analysis across grade shows that students who scored at entering and emerging levels of this assessment are in grades one and two. Transitioning and Expanding level students are mostly in grades three to fifth. This year, we will continue implementing more hand on activities to foster more comprehensible input as well as to implement the SIOP Model to develop more language learning across the different subject areas. Additionally, we have revisited our writing curricum units, in which more emplasis is geared to non-fiction and complex texts to enrich vocabulary and comply with the high academic demands of the new shifts on the Common Core Learning Standards. The Revised Language Assessment Battery test (R-LAB) and Fountas & Pinnell reading data also shows that most of our students in the Transitional Bilingual Program need more scaffolds in literacy development in Spanish. To provide more support in the home language, we are utilizing the Fountas and Pinnel Program to address the different reading levels and needs in Spanish and provide support in small group instruction for reading, writing and math. Additionally, our ELL population will receive (math, ELA) support through our deparmentalized homerooms in grades four and five. Through this model, Ms. Eberty, Ms. Bear and Ms. Zarychta, our expert teachers in these content areas will support our students in small group settings in literacy and Math. Every deparmentalized classroom is equipped with the resources to scaffold content area instruction. In the content area of science, Ms. Evora, our Bilingual teacher ensures that ENL lessons are geared to support the language levels of the students (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding). As necessary, Evora adjusts the instructioanl focus in English or Spanish for more comprehensible input. To further support students in the Common Core Learning Stardards, we will continue scaffold strategies for learning content vocabulary and analyzing complex text materials through group discussions. At the Entering and Emerging levels of the NYSESLAT Test, students are more engaged in hands on activities, visual aids in order to support comprehensible input. The goal of our small group instruction service is to provide our ELL students with the tools to learn language skills and content. Our Transitioning and Expanding level students are immersed in literacy activities that promote vocabulary in context and with a lot of emphasis on learning how to analyze the text and structures of the English language. In addition, the students are engaged in group discussions and writing activities, where they learn to negotiate ideas and enhance their oral language skills, grammar functions, and academic language in order to achieve goals to meet higher standards and attain proficiency in English. Part of our Academic Intervention Services at the school for our ELL population are planned according to the areas of reading, writing, ELA and the modalities of the NYSESLAT (listening/speaking and reading/writing). In the After School Program, students are highly engaged in literacy skills that enhance the development of vocabulary, reading and writing, test prep strategies, and constructive conversational skills in order to continue improving in the areas of listening and speaking. Technology is used to incorporate literacy, and accelerate academic language instruction and ENL. The after school program funded by Title III programs will be conducted twice a week for about four hours and on Saturdays sessions, for about four hours (starting in September.) ELL students in third, fourth and fifth grades will be participating and will receive language support in literacy development. Our Inquiry Team looks very closely at students’ data and individual skills. This information is used to support teachers and academic instruction. As a school, we are continuously gathering information to assess 2018-19 CEP 60  progress toward established goals, and measuring how strategies are working. Therefore, our evaluation consists on focusing on program goals, using the standardized rubrics, criteria, assessment checklists, selecting indicators of students’ achievement and program, collecting information and analyzing it for continuous program improvement. Additionally, the effectiveness of our program development consists in training staff through professioanl development, common grade meetings, learning walks, providing quality instruction, developing English language skills, notifying parents of program options and activities, and identifying program weaknesses and strengths. The ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) reveals that we have about 24 students out of 81 ELLS who show one year of progress moving at least one level of language development. Further, 25% of our ELL population shows at least 3 at risk factors on this data. Our former ELLs (38%) on the data analysis shows that they need more support on the ELA test. As a school, we have also analyzed the data and highlighted the students that show more than 3 at risk factors during professional develpment. The After school program and a Saturday Academy Program will support students in the are of Science, NYSESLAT, Math, and home language instruction in Spanish. This was our first year using the Target of Measure (TOM) as an assessment in the area of writing and according to the grade level and claims of the assessment. Implementing the TOM is helping us as a school to get to know more in depth the students who need further academic support in the area of writing. We are more aware that students writing level is related to the level of their English language proficiency (entering, emerging, transitioning , expanding and commanding), and this will help us keep in mind strategies we need to incorpate for as well as to increase higher expectations. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to make adjustments to our programs and disseminate the data, we have the following in place: . Periodic assessments: Fountas and Pinnell and informal running records that provide us with the student strengths and weaknesses. These assessments are utilized to increase more reading support in the classroom and help us determine which students are not meeting standards in reading. Students who need more support are referred to our Response to Intervention (RTI) team, Ms. Rella, and Ms. Seemen in this area. . Grade Meetings are utilized to discuss reading, writing, math, bilingual and ENL data. At this time, we have the opportunity to share the English proficiency levels of our students and the impact of academic achievement. Therefore, we make changes to the curriculum based on these findings and plan for next steps, in which teachers incorporate the use of ENL strategies and vocabulary development. . Through Learning Walks, we are able to gather more information about the implementation of our academic programs. The purpose of the learning walks is to help us make adjustments to our instruction and this enables us to provide teachers with Professional Development according to needs. Additionally, based on the data and the Danielson Rubric Framework, ENL teachers and monolingual teachers work together to share and present strategies on language development ENL methodology during our 80 minutes of PD, Parent Tuesdays, grade and inquiry team meetings. As a result, a Professional Development School calendar is created to support teachers in all academic areas of the Common Core Learning Standards in ELA and Math, the New Language Arts Progressions and the Danielson Framework. Some of the Professional Developments we have presented based on the findings are: . Questioning and Discussion Techniques (3b) . Student Engagement (3c) . Assessment before, during and after Instruction (3d) . ENL Strategies Part 1 and Part 2 2018-19 CEP 61  . NYSESLAT Instruction and Administration . SIFE Curriculum . Explicit Instruction . Framework for Teaching: The Gradual Release of Responsibility . Targets of Measures (TOMs) . Achieve 3000, differentiated reading instruction that reaches students one on one . Metamorphisis, iquiry based Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: For the ENL model, students at the Entering level will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction, which includes 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated instruction (ELA). For the Emerging level, students will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction, which includes 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ ELA instruction and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL through the content areas. Students at the Transitioning level will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction with distribution of 90 minutes of ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL. At the Expanding level, students only receive 180 minutes of ENL/ ELA or other content area instruction. Students who, on the NYSESLAT Test, move to the Commanding level will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction for two years of support Ms. Montolio and Ms. Larrea, our English as a New Language teachers (ENL) deliver ENL instruction through standalone and integrated models to meet the needs or our ELL students. In the standalone model, we meet the linguistics demands at various English proficiency levels. Ms. Larrea provides 360 minutes of ENL instruction to students at the entering and emerging levels scaffolding vocabulary and language. During instruction, Larrea utilizes visuals to support the content. Further reading instruction, she implements the Wilson Reading Program to enforce decoding and encoding skills for Entering and Emerging levels. For students in the lower grades at the entering and emerging levels, she also includes big books for shared reading to support more language development. Additionally, our IEP/ELLs that are the transitioning and expanding levels are provided 180 minutes of ENL instruction through the integrated model, which is provided by Ms. Larrea in the classroom. Sudents at the transitioning and expanding levels mostly in grades 3-5 are provided 180 ENL instructionl delivered by Ms. Montolio. The ENL instruction is provided to the students through the Standalone and Integrated models. In the integrated model, Ms. Montolio supports the content and language development by scaffolding strategies in reading and writing in the classroom and in the library in small group settings. Ms. Montolio also provides ENL instruction to our Commanding level students of 90 minutes of ELA instruction. Emphasis is placed on reading for meaning and vocabulary development in context to increase comprehension. To support in the area of writing, Ms. Montolio incorporates in her lessons the linguistic demands according to the language and grade level of the student. This is implemented through non-fiction and informational texts by Crosswalk Coach for the Common Core Standards. ENL 2018-19 CEP 62  lessons are geared to develop clear content and language objectives, social skills, foster conversational skills and discussions Additionally, our ENL teachers maintain on-going communication with the classroom teacher to plan lessons that foster comprehension and strategies to learn, how to best support further instruction and adjust the lesson. Through Common Core aligned texts, Ms. Montolio makes sure that language scaffolds are fostered in the content areas of science, social studies and are provided with the skills they need to meet the standards of the ELA and the new shifts in acquiring literacy. A lot of emphasis in placed on analysis of expressions in English, and writing by modeling the use of good sentence structures. Further, students are also provided with the scaffods to participate in good conversational skills, whiich will prepare them for college. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: Our Transitional Bilingual Model supports students in ENL and home language acquisition. This model has a Home Language Arts component, in which students will develop skills in the home language that support literacy in speaking, reading, listening and writing in Spanish. Additionally, there is an ENL component in English to develop skills in the four modalities and a third component with a minimum of two content area subjects in both the home language and in English. Students at the Entering level will receive 75% of instruction in their home language and 25% in English; for the Emerging level 60% of instruction is in the home language and 40% in English; for the Transitioning level, 50% of instruction is in the home language and 50% in English and at the Expanding level, they will receive 25% of instruction in Spanish and 75% in English. We currently have three Transitional Bilingual Classes grades K-5, varying English proficiency levels from either entering or emerging. We support the linguistic demands in the home language (75% of instruction), in which our students learn how to read and write, acquire vocabulary to enhance comprehension. To be in compliance with CR Part 154, ENL instruction for our entering and emerging level students, we individualize instruction by grouping them to support the development of English through the content areas such as science and social studies. The teacher implements strategies to scaffold concepts and vocabulary in order to meet higher standards. Read alouds are included to promote the development of speaking and listening. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Paste response to questions here: To comply with CR Part 154 with mandated minutes delivered for the different program models we offer at the school, we follow the guidelines stated in the English Language Learner Policy and Reference Guide 2015-2016. As it is stated, each language level specifies the number of minutes of Standalone ENL and Integrated instruction for the different content areas and ENL support. Based on the ELL Policy, ENL instruction is delivered to our ELL population according to CR Part 154-2 (K-8) units of study. For the bilingual model, the language allocation of instruction also depends on the student NYSESLAT levels. Bilingual and ENL schedules are created to follow the language mandates for the home and English language instruction. For the ENL model, students at the Entering level will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction, which includes 180 minutes of Stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated instruction (ELA). For the Emerging leel, students will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction, which includes 90 minutes of Stand-alone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction and 90 minutes of Stand-alone or Integrated ENL through the content areas. Students at the Transitioning level will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction of 90 minutes of ELA and 90 minutes of Stand-alone or Integrated ENL. At the Expanding level, students will be 2018-19 CEP 63  provided with 180 minutes of ENL/ELA or other content area instruction. Students who on the NYSESLAT reached level of Commanding will receive 90 minutes of Integrated instruction or other content area in the classroom for two years. Our Transitional Bilingual Model (Spanish) supports students in ENL and Home Language Arts. In the home language instruction, students will develop literacy skills in Spanish: speaking, listening, reading and writing. There is an ENL component to develop skills in the four modalities of language acquisition; a third component with a minimum of two content area subjects in both the home language and in English. Studnts at the Entering level will receive 75% of instruction in their home language and 25% in English. For the Emerging level 60% of instruction is in the home language and 40% in English; for the Transitional level, 50% of instruction is in the home language and 50% in English and at the Expanding level, students will receive 25% of instruction in Spanish and 75% on ENL. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: All instruction in the Transitional Bilingual Program is geared to developing home language skills to support literacy development, and at the same time, is also geared to learn the language of the Common Core. Bilingual instruction also prepares our students for college and career readiness. Ms. Allison Gadlin, our Generation Ready Consultant also ensures that the units of study in reading and writing (Common Core aligned) are implemented aproximately about 4-6 weeks to provide students. In the area of reading, teachers scaffold strategies with a clear focus on reading skills to foster comprehension for main idea, sequence of events, problem and solution, facts and opinions, etc. Writing units are geared to enhance the specific genres according to grade levels and are adjusted to fit the needs of the different English language proficiency levels, such as persuavice writing, narrative accounts, poetry, informational texts, etc. In the Stand-alone model, the content is delived through Common Core aligned texts to support the ELA and the high demands of content related vocabulary. We utilize CrossWalk Coach texts for the Common Core State Standards by grade level and taking into account the students English language proficiency levels. The content in this model is planned carefully by analyzing the scaffolds students need to be successful. For example, our pre-plan lessons include a content, language and social focus. We follow the Gradual Release of Responsibility teaching model (GRR) to support students in learning language skills and content through structured teaching. In the integrated model, ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to discuss assessments, support instruction and make content more comprehensible to students. To scaffold the content, the classroom teacher scaffolds by explaining the content focus of the lesson, whereas, the ENL teacher roles is to assure that the language focus is clear and specific to the lesson by modeling scaffolds such as highlighted vocabulary with picture prompts, discussing language, analyzing vocabulary in context, and creating discussions with students. Heteregoneous groups are formed within this model to differentiate instructions and provide students with the opportunity to benefit from other strategies. At the end of each lesson, both teachers reconvene to further discuss strategies that were useful and plan for next steps. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: Here at P. S. 226, assessment is on-ongoing. At the beginning of the year, P.S. 226 school community implements a baseline writing assessment to provide support in this area to our students and drive instruction. For the bilingual classes, the writing assessment is implemented in Spanish to provide more support in the home language. This writing assessment is done three times a year to monitor progress and help teachers adjust the lesson and locate resources suitable for the units. To assess in the area of reading, we utilize Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment guide in Spanish. This assesment is also implemented three times a year, where we assess the three reading cueing systems: meaning, structure and visual. Running 2018-19 CEP 64  records are also implemented to determine the strategies students are using and plan for next steps during the literacy block. The running records are done at least twice a month depending on the reading levels of the students. To provide more support in the content area of math, we monitor progress by implementing math end unit tests in Spanish at the end of each chapter from the Math Go program. To assess the different math skills, we also implement summative assessments three times a year (base-line, mid-line, and end-line tests). Progress reports are sent home to keep parents informed about students' progress and the skills they need to be on grade math level. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: This year, for Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), teachers will continue to support instruction in the home language and in the content area of math, science, and social studies. As a result of our SIFE Questionaire and Oral Interview, the data shows that our bilingual students need to develop more literacy skills in Spanish. Therefore, the newcomers are also supported through our technological program, Rosetta Stone and our Title III Afterschool Program to support the new language as well in reading and writing. They will also participate in the Saturday Academy, which is mainly strategizes skills in the area of the ELA and Math. In addition, our ENL teachers will collaborate with the classroom teachers in supporting them with ENL tools, hands-on activities at the entering and emerging levels. For our developing ELLs (4-6 years) and long-term ELLs, they will be immersed in our early After School Program starting at the end of September. The After School Program will consist of high implemention literacy skills and reading comprehension strategies aligned to the Bilingual Common Common Core Progressions and Common Core Learning Standards. In the After School program, they will also be provided with strategized ENL instruction to support vocabulary development in the content areas. For students who need more support in the home language in reading and writing, we are creating a Saturday Program, in which they are going to learn to be better readers and writers in Spanish. The program will run for about four hours. ENL strategies are going to be implemented through shared reading and hands-on activities. The service for our Former or Commanding level ELLs will be provided twice a week for 90 minutes of ELA instruction and Common Core aligned resources. They will also be provided with strategies in the area of writing as we noticed that the data reveals a great need in this area. Additionally, this ELL subgroup will partcipate in the After School Program, in math, ELA, and science instruction for fourth grade. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: To promote language development for our ELLs, teachers adjust the language demands of the lesson by paraphrsing, repeating key words, using content clues, use of modeling specific strategies and by directing instruction on grammar and vocabulary in context. Our goal for this year is to fully implement the Bilingual Language Arts Progressions and to continue aligning the The Common Core Learning Standards, the Danielson Rubric and the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol Model (SIOP). All teachers are involved in common grade plannin. At this time, the curriculum grade unit is developed to address the demands 2018-19 CEP 65  of the grade content and language needs. The learning strategies for ELLs and IEPs are evident and posted on the grade curriculum board. Through the IEP/ENL Committee this year, we were able to discuss instructional strategies for all our ELLs and especially students with an IEP. In addition, the committee was able to present the reading data and level of English level to further support the students. Some of the supports we discussed to accelerate language development were six key strategies for teachers of English language Learners, characteristics of ELLs, and book clubs. We will continue aligning the mandated units of service according to CR Part 154, in which the content will implemented according to the five proficiency levels of the NYSESLAT: Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding. Our Science Academy also enables our student to be involved in hands on activities and access to content specific vocabulary. For the specific content, we utilize the Foss Program to accelerate vocabulary in English. For reading and word study, we utilize the Wilson Fundations Program. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: To ensure that our ELLs with IEPs receive service according to their mandated IEP goals, Ms. Jawski, our Assistant Principal, supports by creating flexible schedules for the ENL and IEP Programs, such as developing common and vertical planning, in which both teachers of ELLs, Ms. Montolio and Ms. Larrea are included. Scheduling our bilingual and IEP students for support in reading, writing and math to monolingual classes for one period is also part of our goal in order to attain English proficiency. We currently have one IEP teacher (Ms. Sparrano), who is responsible for reviewing the IEP mandates' bilingual instruction and placing students accordingly. Ms. Montolio and Ms. Larrea follow the IEP mandates and units of instruction according to the English proficiency level of the student and maintain on-going communication with the classroom teacher. To achieve the IEP goals, we also service this subgroup population through the Integrated ENL Model, in which the ENL strategies, the content and the language focus are carefully plan based on the curriculum and language level. Further, ENL and IEP teachers utilize the IEP data from SESIS to create flexible schedules and meet the goals of the students. The IEP information is is discussed to align goals from the IEP and classroom instruction. Additionally, staff development is geared for other programs of support such as the After School, the Saturday Academy Sessions to enhance language of instruction, data assessment and strategies for working with students with IEPs. To support small group instruction, teachers also collaborate with paraprofessionals assigned to the classroom to further support students with individualized instruction. To meet the diverse needs of our ELL and IEP students, we utilize the NYSESLAT data and the students' Instructional Plan (IEP) to align language and curriculum goals and create flexible scheduling, comply with curriculum and meet the mandated units of service. School wide data is created through a spreadsheet, which includes the ELA and Math scores. Based on the data, we create suitable programs for our subgroup population. These programs are delivered by our Academic Intervention Support personnel in reading (Ms. Rella and Ms. Seeman). Programs used by our Academic Intervention Support personnel include Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy to support guided reading instruction in the new language, and Reading Rescue for more individualized phonics instruction. In addition, we use outside consultants who support teachers with strategies in ELA and math. •For testing accommodations, our ELL population is offered language electives mainly in Spanish, and for those students that either come from different ethnic backgrounds, we obtain text translations through the New York City Department of Education Resources in order to provide them with texts in a language they can understand and read. ELLs with an IEP mandates are guided by the IEP plan and the mandates on protocol testing . We utilize the RLAT to support students with other languages such as Twi, Bengali and French. 2018-19 CEP 66  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: We align the mandated of units of service according to CR Part 154.2, in which the integrated content of support will be implemented according to the different levels of the NYSESLAT: Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding. To support the different language levels, we have our Saturday Academy Program, in which most of our entering and emerging level students are immersed in literacy and strategies for acquaring strategies in the four modalities: speaking, listening, reading and writing. Our science academy also enables our students to be actively involved in hands-on activities and access to content specific vocabulary. In the content area of science, we use the FOSS Program to accelerate vocabulary in English. For reading and word study, we utilize the Wilson Fundation Program. Students participating in this program are highly immersed in learning phonemic skills in English. To meet the diverse needs of our IEP students, we use the NYSESLAT data and the students' Instructional Plan (IEP) to align language and curriculum goals and create flexible scheduling, comply with curriculum and meet the mandated units of service. School wide data is created through a spreadsheet which includes the ELA and Math scores, subgroups such as ELL students and students with IEP's. Based on the data, we create suitable programs for our subgroup population; these programs are provided by three support personnel (Ms. Hunte, Ms. Rella and Ms. Seeman). Programs used by our Academic Intervention Support personnel include Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy and Reading Rescue. In addition, we have two consultants to provide more support to teachers and students in the areas of math and literacy. In math instruction, teachers utilize the Metamorphosis method where students explore strategies to increase their critical thinking skills in small group settings to solve real world math problems and concepts. Based on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL levels, Instruction in the early grades in the bilingual classrooms, is conducted in Spanish as we have students that are either entering or emerging level. For testing accommodations, our ELL population is offered language electives mainly in Spanish, and for those students that either come from different ethnic backgrounds, we obtain text translations through the New York City Department of Education Resources in order to provide them with texts in a language they can understand and read. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here:Based on the data of the ELA, Math and Science results, we will continue to provide the following to our ELL population: . Early After School Program (September) to increase more common Core Aligned literacy resourcess . Continue with Math and Science Academies. Increase read alouds through the content areas with focused questions in order to enhance listening skills. Strategize instruction for our Developing and Long-Term ELLs . Enhance strategic Guided Reading . Incorporate more math discourse via math inquiry For the school year 2017-2018, we are implementing a new math program from Engage New York and a Turn Around Program for children to support student social-emotional needs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: At this time, we have a Transitional Bilingual Program in grades K-5, in which instruction Spanish according to parent choice and program selection. For those parents that are requesting ENL service, we are honoring their choice and providing the service to students through Standalone or Integrated Models. As a school , we are increasing the number of students to commanding level of the NYSESLAT Test. Part of our action plan is to have more integrated models of support according to Part 154 in order for our students to benefit more from class instruction. Also, providing our students with more rigorous academic standard work, we are making greater efforts to align 2018-19 CEP 67  all content areas and language learning to the Common Core Learning Standards. In previous years, we serviced our ELLs mostly through the Standalone Model, and as a result, students had less access to content learning in the classroom. This year, we are offering more Integrated Models to best service our ELLs by correlating classroom instruction with the ENL teachers. Our After Program will be also re-assesed, in which, we will also implement a base-line, mid-line and end-line assessment to measure progress in reading and writing. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: Curently, our ELL students are receiving Tier 2 Academic Intervention Services in math and in literacy by Ms. Seemen and Ms. Rella. The ENL and RTI teachers service students in small groups to develop language, math, and reading skills. Further, AIS and ENL teachers are using the the Response to Intervention Model to ensure effective lesson plans for all our ELL students. Lesson plans include components such as content and language objective related to English proficiency level, prior knowledge in English and Home Language. The ENL strategies are also aligned though the Common Core Learning Standards K-5 to support the ELL subgroup in this task, by scaffolding vocabulary, learning strategies for language, providing explicit grammar instruction, and using hands-on manipulatives when applicable. Throughout the eight week period, ENL and RTI teachers closely monitor their student’s data and progress through progress reports and regular articulations with classroom teachers. The literacy intervention is implemented three days of ELA and two days of math a week done through Go Math, Leveled Literacy, Reading Rescue and Wilson Fundation Program. Students who scored level 1 and level 2 in the area of math, are receiving intervention two days a week during the day time. Additionally, they are being supported in math two days a week during Extenday Day in small group (Tier 2 Academic intervention). The Math intervention for After School is implemented through an extension from Go Math Program (day one), Engage NY, and through CrossWalk Roads math textbooks.Some students also receive Tier three (one-on-one) support to help them strengthen their reading skills. When necessary, these students might receive the support in Spanish. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: The following instructional materials and technology programs are implemented to foster content learning and vocabulary in the bilingual lower grade classrooms: Smarty Ants is a software program, which helps to enhance phonemic awareness through picture support and vocabulary activities. Vocabulary is also supported by graphics in the new language as well as increasing the listening skills, as students listen and follow instruction. For next school year, we will continue having this program because it provides our students with strategies for learning meanings of words in context in a comfortable and safe atmosphere. Additionally, there is a great demand on acquiring academic vocabulary which is necessary to increase reading comprehension skills. For more vocabulary support, we use a student practice book, A Word A Day by Eva-Moor and Ready Gen. The technology Program, Roseta Stone for ELLs, allows students to learn more English while also supporting the basic skills of reading. Within this program, students are assessed and placed according to language level in need of support. Gradually, students build on the skills in order to move to the next English language proficiency level. The reading components of the program entail: decoding, vocabulary, reading according to level, listening and following verbal and written directions. To increase math skills and close the achievement gap in this area, we support our students through the IXL math technology program. Based on the math assessment built in the program, students are placed accordingly in order to practice the math skills they need more support in. Another instructional program we implement with our ELLs is the FOSS Science, in which students are provided with hands-on activities and content area vocabulary. Students are provide with a practice book on hands on activities in English and Spanish. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 68  Paste response to question here: At P.S. 226, we support the linguistic needs of ELL’s in the bilingual classes by providing instruction in Spanish and English. This year, we have a bilingual K/1, 2/3, and a 4/5 bilingual classes . The teachers incorporate language development strategies in Spanish as well in English through ESL methodologies. In order to support the students in home language acquisition, content knowledge and skills, we use Fountas and Pinnel in Spanish to teach guided reading in small group settings, big books for shared reading and learn vocabulary and language structures. Our Transitional Bilingual Model supports students in ENL and home language acquisition. This model has a home language art and new English component, in which students will develop skills in both languages in speaking, reading, listening and writing. The ENL component is to develop skills in the four modalities, and a third component with a minimum of two content area subjects in both the home language and in English. Students at the Entering level will receive 75% of instruction in their home language and 25% in English; for the Emerging level 60% of instruction is in the home language and 40% in English; for the Transitioning level, 50% of instruction is in the home language and 50% in English and at the Expanding level, they will receive 25% of instruction in Spanish and 75% in English. Students learn to read and write in the home language (Spanish). Content areas are taught interdisciplinary to foster more English development with emphasis on concepts and high demand on reading and writing. “El Cancionero” a poetry collection by Lada Josefa Kratky and Sube by Agnes Chavez, a learning Spanish tool for Art, Music, are used to further support students with more language skills in reading, phonemic awareness, and vocabulary development. We also implement thematic units in both languages to enhance social skills and reinforce language functions. The skills for more advanced readers are strengthened through activities such as self-directed questioning, and semantic mapping. To support vocabulary and language development in English, we use as supplement reading program, Ready Gen. The writing component incorporates strategies to support the process of learning ENL, such as grammar development in context, and structures and patterns that may be similar or different to the English language. The Gradual Release of Responsibility teaching model also supports our instructional practice and components of our lesson plan, such as creating a clear content, language and social objectives. Teachers adjust the writing curriculum and plan monthly the genres they need to address according to the grade level. Through the writing process, students begin to gather information step by step, giving them an opportunity to work at their own pace and in groups. Center activities are prepared to support content and social language development. In addition, the ENL instructional program is developed through content area skills such as Science, Social Studies, Art, and Character Developement. ENL Stand-alone Program In our ENL Standalone Program, the ENL provider implements shared reading lessons to foster comprehensible input, social and academic language. These resources, such as CrossWalk Coach aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards are also utilized to provide our students with the reading strategies and language structures they need to become good readers and writers. Mainly these materials are implemented with third through fifth grade students. The ENL teacher maintains on-going communication with classroom teachers to correlate instructional ENL strategies and thematic units in the classroom. To further support students in reading and writing, The ENL teacher provides constructive feedback to students and teachers in specific areas of needs and provides strategies to scaffold academic vocabulary to increase comprehensible input. In the area of writing, we are meeting on a weekly basis as a grade to analyze student’s writing strenghts and weaknesses. Based on this data analysis, we are creating a plan of action to help students reach higher academic standards. In the area of listening, we are utilizing the listening center, dictations (mainly from texts where students have been familiarized), and highlighting strategies to understand higher order thinking questions. For the ENL model, students at the Entering level will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction, which includes 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated instruction (ELA). For the Emerging level, students will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction, which includes 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ ELA instruction and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL through the content areas. Students at the Transitioning level will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction with distribution of 90 minutes of ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL. At the Expanding level, students only receive 180 minutes of ENL/ ELA or other content area instruction. Students who, on the NYSESLAT Test, move to the Commanding level will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction for two years of support. . Since we have a variety of proficiency and grade levels as well as the NYSESLAT modalities within the ENL Stand-alone model, our ENL providers, Ms. Montolio and Ms. Larrea integrate appropriate grade content area materials, activities and thematic units connected to the school curriculum, which incorporate the four literacy skills necessary to become proficient in English. Resources to support English instruction are fully Common Core aligned. The focus of each lesson is also aligned to the Bilingual Language Arts Progressions and standards according to grade level. Other components of this program are read 2018-19 CEP 69  aloud to enhance vocabulary development and comprehension skills, shared reading to support the early grades, hands on projects to make connections to the functions of the language, reader’s theater to assist students in responding to literature and facilitate learning the structure of the English language in a non-threatening environment. ENL Integrated Model As a school, we are making greater efforts and plans to develop more ENL Integrated Model classes. We are closely monitoring patterns and trends of incoming students at P S 226 as well as looking at student’s similar NYSESLAT levels and areas of language needs in order to determine more Self-Contained ENL Models for our population. Through this model, the classroom and the ENL teacher work as a team to develop ENL instructional approaches to support the students and lessons. Both teachers plan ahead of time to support students mainly in the area of literacy (e.g. shared reading, read aloud, writing, grouping) during the articulation period . Furthermore, the ENL teacher supports this process by presenting lessons that address the needs of our ELL students, such as the development of comprehensible input, vocabulary development, and strategies on how to best support language and learning. For the ENL model, students at the Entering level will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction, which includes 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated instruction (ELA). For the Emerging level, students will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction, which includes 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ ELA instruction and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL through the content areas. Students at the Transitioning level will receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction with distribution of 90 minutes of ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL. At the Expanding level, students only receive 180 minutes of ENL/ ELA or other content area instruction. Students who, on the NYSESLAT Test, move to the Commanding level will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction for two years of support. Since we have a variety of grade and proficiency levels as well as numerous NYSESLAT modalities within the ENL Standalone Program, our ESL provider integrates appropriate grade content area materials, activities and thematic units connected to the school curriculum, which incorporate the four literacy skills necessary to become proficient in English. Other components of this program are read aloud to enhance vocabulary development and comprehension skills, shared reading to support the early grades, hands on projects to make connections to the functions of the language, reader’s theater to assist students in responding to literature and facilitate learning the structure of the English language in a non-threatening environment. We are closely monitoring patterns and trends of incoming students at P S 226 as well as looking at student’s similar NYSESLAT levels and areas of language needs in order to determine more Self-Contained ENL Models for our population. Based on these patterns on NYSESLAT levels and areas of need, this year, we will have bilingual teacher to support the bilingual models and an ENL teacher to scaffold instruction in the ENL classrooms. Ms. Echevarria, our bilingual teacher will team teach in the bilingual setting to teach content and support students in Home Language Arts in Spanish. Through this model, the classroom and the ENL teacher work as a team to develop ENL instructional approaches to support the students and lessons. Both teachers plan ahead of time to support students mainly in the area of literacy (e.g. shared reading, read aloud, writing, grouping) during the articulation period . Furthermore, the ENL teacher supports this process by presenting lessons that address the needs of our ELL students, such as the development of comprehensible input, vocabulary development, and strategies on how to best support language and learning. To further support our students, we make good use of center activities to differentiate instruction, language, and learning styles. During the Push-In, all teachers including the ENL provider and assistant teacher work in small group instruction to facilitate learning and address the individual needs of the students. For more group time and individualization, we utilize Shared Reading Extensions to reinforce vocabulary, structures, and enhance in the areas of listening and speaking by engaging students in accountable talk activities. Part of our on-going conversation with classroom teachers includes how to strategize for our ELL population, the importance of scaffolding for all academic areas. Through our daily lessons and ENL instruction, teachers scaffold language learning by making connections to prior knowledge, having a clear focus in their lessons, using a variety of hands on learning and visual aids, such as poems with large prints, puppets to facilitate more accountable talk, chants for the development of listening skills and fluency, graphic organizers to visually represent information, dioramas to construct and build on knowledge and create scenes. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 70  Paste response to question here: As per CR Part 154 for English Learners, we follow the guidelines established in the Policy and Referenc guide for 2015-2016. All our ELL students that are entitled to ESL/bilingual services and are identified as having special needs, especially in reading and writing including SIFE students are also mandated to participate in our Extended Day and After School Program, which provides literacy development skills through content material, evaluates students’ performance, and analyzes data to drive instruction. In the Supplemental Program (SES), students are highly engaged in literacy skills that enhance the development of vocabulary, reading and writing, test prep strategies, and accountable talk in order to continue improving in the areas of listening and speaking. Technology is used to incorporate literacy, and accelerate academic ENL instruction. Furthermore, our Extension of Service Program for students who test out on the NYSESLAT and are entitled to 90 minutes of instruction is supported through strong planning based on the standards and performance indicators, data analysis of the NYSESLAT and student work, setting goals in all academic areas, on-going formal and informal evaluations, in which ELL students are closely observed to determine further instruction and academic intervention services. Our school offers different programs for ELLs. One of the new program is the "Peer to Peer Mentoring Program." As we are aware that our ELLs encounter numerous challenges, our counselor, Mr. Urena, helps students make the transition into their new school and culture by involving them in different topics such as: sports, music, how to resolve conflicts, show respect for all, and expectations so that they know what to do and can meet their goals. Some ELLs are entitled to receive mandated counseling and we provide them with activities to grab their interest. We also allow them to use sand paper and stress balls to keep them in control. Also, ELLs are paired up with other students that speak the same language so that they can develop a strong communication in working with a partner. In addition, they provide the skills to immigrant/ELL students on how to balance the value system of their home culture, with those of the dominant culture, which prevails at school. The Peer-to-Peer Program is implemented to serve the needs of diverse immigrant students from all parts of the world. Its main focus is to help them experience equal success while integrating into the American culture and school system in general. The specific aims of the Peer-to-Peer Mentoring Program are as follows: 1. To support the learning process of the diverse and immigrant children by pairing them with peer mentors. 2. To provide resources to the immigrant/ELL students such as topics of interest on sports, music, etc. 3. To provide support and mentoring as well as safe recreational activities during school hours. Among other things that we offer to our ELL students is "temporary housing." This is a great support for families that are struggling in the new country. • Our action plan for ELLs receiving service four to six years is to continue service them according to informed data analyzes, which include the different modalities of the NYSESLAT test, Fountas and Pinell reading data, students’ writing samples and performance in all academic areas of instruction in order to develop suitable programs and target specific needs. Our Academic Intervention Program provides student with guided reading in small group instruction, implemented by our AIS provider on a daily basis. Additionally, our Math Coach also provides students and teachers with instructional math strategies and rigorous academic work in small group settings. To further support our ELL students, and specially Long Term ELLs, our school utilizes the RLER Report, which provides information on the years of service. Furthermore, we utilize this information to determine effectiveness of program placement and to determine any other academic intervention support the students can be provided with to meet standards and become English proficient. As a school team, we present the data analysis and students’ accomplishments to our School Based Support Team to further support our ELL population. We discuss programs in which students can participate for about six weeks, pinpoint strategies and areas of strength on the student, and reconvene to evaluate student’s performance and further academic support. In our school, each grade meets during our Inquiry Team, in which strategically, the ELL population is studied to address an area in need of improvement. To provide our students with additional support, high achievement for both ELL and IEP students is promoted through initiatives designed to assure access to academic curricula, materials, technology, extra curricular services and to foster self-esteem. These include coordination of bilingual and mainstream curricula, development of materials (hands on learning, picture cards, listening to chants, songs, access to technology and projects) developing programs and services, which address ELLs language needs. Additionally, educational assistants work in small group instruction to provide supplemental support to students with an IEP. Language development is further developed during the Extended Day Program, and our Supplemental Program (SES) on Saturdays, which integrates school day instruction and enhances reading and writing curricula supporting vocabulary development, and instruction in Mathematics and other content areas. The ENL support for newcomers and Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) is provided by using materials which contain pictures, patterned language, hands-on activities and language and strategies that can be comprehensible to students to help them to become independent readers and writers while learning the curriculum. This year we are implementing new ways to identify and serve these struggling students such as providing more resources to teachers through the SIFE curriculum Engage NY. At time of registration we as a school conduct informal and oral interview on the child’s educational background and experience in order to identify needs and program of instruction. Our SIFE initiative and program development main focus is to provide these students with small group instruction, especially based on data analysis and in the area of literacy and math. Since our students with Formal Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) are mainly from Hispanic backgrounds, we are also supporting them 2018-19 CEP 71  by providing home language instruction in Math, reading and writing in Spanish. For emergent readers, for example, literacy skills are developed through strategies appropriate to students’ stage of language proficiency. Some of the strategies used to build vocabulary are TPR (Total Physical Response), role play, rebus sentences and matching words to pictures and sentence building. In addition, our technology programs such as IXL for Math, Smarty Ant are used to enhance on specific math skills, to focus on Phonemic awareness and the development of students’ listening skills to support reading. All new comers support on vocabulary is also done through this program as well as they benefit from hearing the new language with visual supports and instruction in the home language. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: To ensure that our students academic, linguistic and socioemotional needs are met, at P. S. 226, this is done through a number of ways: Professional development is offered during our Mondays or Tuesdays, facilitated by Ms. Matos and Mr. Urena, our school counselors. During this time, they share resources such as the guide to Bullying Prevention, which supports the socioemotional needs. These resources are also provided to the teachers for the entire school year to ensure they get familiar with impact of bullying, ways to prevent bullying, cyberbullying and strategies to raise student awareness. Reading, writing and math resource centers are created by teachers during grade meetings to differentiate instruction. These resources are then shared with other grades to support students that are at risk of not meeting standards by the end of the school year. Other professional areas are located in each classroom with resources on the curriculum unit for writing; Go Math program resources are clearly labeled so that students can have access to the math tools, textbooks and strategies. Additionally, the library is labeled with texbooks for guided reading instruction to support the different reading levels; ENL resources are in a specific area of the library to support our ELLs in the area of the NYSESLAT test and language development. Resources that utilized by our AIS team are obtained from the library to support our academic intervention programs such as Wilson, Literacy Level Books and Engage NY. To coordinate instruction and other resources, data is also shared through Google drive. This includes lessons, articles to support complex text strategies, reading, writing and math data. The following instructional materials are utilized to foster content learning vocabulary: Wordly Wise is a word study program that provides our students with strategies for learning meanings of words in context. This program is implemented across the grades. Additionally, there is a great demand on academic vocabulary ncessary to increase reading comprehension skills. For vocabulary support, we use a student practice book, A Word A Day by Eva-Moor and Ready Gen. The technology Program, Roseta Stone for ELLs, allows students to learn more English while also supporting the basic skills of reading. Within this program, students are assessed and placed according to language level in need of support. Gradually, students build on the skills in order to move to the next language level. The reading components of the program entail: decoding, vocabulary, reading according to level, listening and following verbal and written directions. Another instructional program we implement with our ELLs is the FOSS Science, in which students are provided with hands-on activities and content area vocabulary. Students are provide with a practice book on hands on activities in English and Spanish. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP 72  Paste response to question here: Our ENL and Bilingual Teachers, Ms. Montolio and Ms. Larrea assist parents in the following:. Bilingual Parent Orientation by June first to inform them about program placement and entitlement to either Bilingual services or ENL .Conduct meetings for new admits with IEP who might be possible ELLs: Language Proficiency Team (LPT). Open House for incoming Kindergateners on June to provide information on grade expectations and get familiar with the school environment. Our Summer Program to provide students with support in ENL instruction and assist them with ELA and Math suport. . Buddy Reading across grades 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: Math Instruction in the early grades in the bilingual classrooms is implemented in Spanish, which is based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results. For testing accommodations, our ELL population is offered language electives in Spanish and English, and for those students who either come from a different language background, Mr. Manzella, our Assistant Principal obtains texts translations, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries through the New York City Department of Education Resources in order to provide them with texts in a language they can read and understand. Mr. Vargas, our Parent Coordinator supports with language translation as well.During the math standardized testing administration, students also are given the choice to take the test in Spanish or English. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: N/A N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: As mandated on CR Part 154.2, all teachers at P. S. 226 will be involved in more professional development for the school year 2017-2018. This will be done through in-house PD on Mondays and Tuesdays after school; outside PD and turning key from ENL and Bilingual teachers. Additionally, teachers will assist in DOE PD offered at other school sites. We will attend our bilingual PD offered at Fordham University to assist our Bilingual teachers in refining their practices with ENL methodoloy and Home Instruction. All teachers will receive a minimum of 15% ELL strategies and instruction during our in-house PD, which is about 15 of 100 hours for the year; our Bilingual and ENL teachers, will receive a minimum of 50% PD of ELL strategies and instruction during in-house PD, Bilingual sites, and DOE websites, which is about 50 of 100 hours. Paste response to question here: To ensure that everyone from our school cummunity and works in a collaboratively environment, we have formed different professional teams: the IEP/ENL Committee, the Math Committee, the Inquiry Team, etc. Our professional calendar includes a variety of topics to support teachers in all academic areas: The Danieslon Rubric Framework, The Common Core Learning Standards, The New Language Arts Progressions, Analysis of the NYSESLAT data, SIFE curriculum, ENL strategies, Reading and Writing Data. This year, we will increase the number of more common grade meetings, in which our Bilingual and ENL teachers will be participating to discuss ELL strategies and support students with Common Core aligned work. During the meetings, we also 2018-19 CEP 73  will be able to examine in depth the Bilingual Common Core Progressions and provide expectations grade by grade and how they are aligned to the different levels of the NYSESLAT Test. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: Ms. Matos, our Bilingual School Counselor for grades 3-5, also supports parents and students in transitioning to middle school. At these meetings, Ms. Manzella discusses the school that may have Bilingual and ENL programs to assist our ELL population. All information provided at this meetings is translated in home language and attached is a document that provide parents with the rights of bilingual students and process for middle school. Paste response to question here: As mandated on CR Part 154.2, all teachers at P. S. 226 will be involved in more professional development for the school year 2017-2018. This will be done through in-house PD on Mondays and Tuesdays after school; outside PD and turning key from ENL and Bilingual teachers. Additionally, teachers will attend in DOE PD offered at other school sites. We will also invite our bilingual support from Fordham University to assist our Bilingual teachers in refining their practices with ENL methodoloy and home instruction. All teachers will receive a minimum of 15% ELL strategies and instruction during our in-house PD, which is about 33 of 220 hours for the year; our Bilingual and ENL teachers, will receive a minimum of 50% PD of ELL strategies and instruction during in-house PD, Bilingual sites, and DOE websites, which is about 110 of 220 hours. For the 2017-2018 school year, P.S.226 will be part of the fourth Cohort of City University of New York- New York State Initiative on Emergent Bilinguals (CUNY-NYSIEB) to get the support needed to improve school services provided to emergent bilinguals. Because of P.S.226's large population of ELLS, our school was chosen to participate in six Leadership Seminars and intensive on-site professional development from September 2017 through June 2018 which will help us reach our goal of expanding our knowledge base about and implementing the necessary components of Part 154 within the school. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: Individual as well as group meetings with parents are held on Parent Tuesdays to discuss student progress reports, on-going assessments, grade expectations and Common Core Learning Standardized work. To strengthten our support between home and school, teachers meet as a grade to provide parents with information on rubrics in Spanish and English. Additionally, teachers share models of exemplary work to show parents how can they best support their child at home and help them move to the next level on the rubric. Teachers also accommodate parents with individual meetings to discuss report cards and strategies for math, content areas, reading and writing. Provisions for other individual meetings are also scheduled during the prep time. Mr. Vargas, our Parent Coordinator supports teachers with translation services as well as our ENL and bilingual teachers, and counselors: Ms. Montolio, Ms. Larrea, Ms. Matos, Mr. Urena and Ms. Echevarria. Request for other interpreting services such as Bengali, Twi, is also supported by Mr. Vargas by allocating translation funds for Parent Teacher Conference through our Title III Program. A letter is sent home notifying the parents of the translation services they will be provided with during PTC to better support them in communicating with the teachers. There is also over-the-phone translation service, where parents have access to Language Line interpretation services in over 200 languages. To support parents in following the protocol, we are assisted by the Bronx Field Support Center. 2018-19 CEP 74  Based on the Parent Survey conducted at the beginning of the school year, several workshops are offered to parents in order to meet their needs. The workshops include: . Mayor's Office of Immigrant Affairs and Work Force One: Job searching assistance opportunities . Understanding the State Math Test: to learn developmental criteria, transition to Common Core and the effective strategies .Smart Start Education to discuss information on the state tests: ELA and Math . Additionally, parental involvement for the Summer is provided through the Fresh Air fund, a non-profit agency. The agency provides free, rich experiences and academic programs for children that come from low-income families or communities. Our Bilingual School Counselor, Mr. Urena for grades 3-5, and Mr. Manzella, one of our Assistant Principals also support parents and students in transitioning to middle school. At these meetings, they discuss the schools that may have Bilingual and ENL programs to assist our ELL population. All information provided at this meetings is translated in the home language and attached is a document that provide parents with the rights of bilingual students and process for middle school. Students also receive support from the classroom teacher in filling out the compliance documents in order to make the transition to the new school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response here: At P. S. 226, there are a number of activities that help foster parental involvement based on the Parent Survey Data: . Monthly Parent Newsletters. Monthly parent calendar . Multicultural Week Celebration . Workshops offered to support parents in different areas such as Mayor's Office of Immigrant Affairs, Work Force, Smart Start Education, etc.. Information on Free Tutoring classes. GED Program. Workshops on NYS Common Core Learning Stardards. Town Hall Meeting meetings. School Leadership Team. Computer Skills. Virginia's House Program to help families in need. Drug Prevention Workshops. Citizenship Workshops. P. S. 226 also provides activities After School to promote greater parental and student involvement through award ceremonies, Thanksgiving Dinner, Fairs, Multicultural Celebrations, and through student productions and family workshops. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: We are waiting for the NYSESLAT results to update our ELL information through the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT). In addition, we may need further assistant with the EDAT as we would like to share the data with our bilingual and all our monolingual teachers for the beginning of the school year 2017-2018, and more support in creating schedules for the Transitional Bilingual Model and the ENL Model in order to be in compliance with CR Part 154. 2018-19 CEP 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Gloria Darden, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 77  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X226 School Name: PS 226 The Nadia J. Pagan School Superintendent: MaribelHulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Edwin Vargas Parent Coordinator Yes - On 01/19/17 Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 226 collects several information and data that is used to provide parents with appropriate translation and within a timely fashion. All parents that are new to the school that are non-English speakers are asked and guided by one of our ENL teachers to complete the Home Language Identification Survey. Such survey provides us in detail which language each parents speaks at home (e.g. Urdu, French, Chinese, Spanish, Arabic). We also run the RCPL report from the Automate The System (ATS) frequently throughout the school year. The RCPL report will let us know of any updated information regarding different languages spoken by each family. We look into blue emergency cards to see if there are other family members that speak other languages. Our Parent Coordinator hands out surveys twice a year.-ATS information - language spoken by the students 2018-19 CEP 78  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic AFRIKAANS Chinese Any Fulani (American) Sign Language Soninke 230 268 1 1 1 1 0 2 45.63 53.17 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0 0.4 224 272 1 1 1 2 1 2 44.44 53.97 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.4 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Parent=Teacher Conferences 4 times a year Principal's Monthly Calendar Monthly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our Parent Coordinator and many of our staff members are fluent in English and Spanish and support any interpretation needed. Other languages that may be in need of translation are serviced with interpretation over-the-phone or any DOE vendor.. Our Parent Coordinator is fluent in English and Spanish and does all the translation needed. Other languages that may be in need of translation are submitted to the translation Service Unit or any DOE vendor. 2018-19 CEP 79  Parent Coordinator's Monthly Calendar Monthly Parent Tuesday s Monthly Our Parent Coordinator is fluent in English and Spanish and does all the translation needed. Other languages that may be in need of translation are submitted to the translation Service Unit or any DOE vendor. Our Parent Coordinator is fluent in English and Spanish and does all the translation needed. Other languages that may be in need of translation are submitted to the translation Service Unit or any DOE vendor. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Tuesday Weekly Parent Workshops Bi-Weekly IEP Meetings On-call Parent Meetings On-Call interpretation service(s)? Several staff members provide interpretation and are trained to use over-the-phone interpretation service. Our Parent Coordinator attends all workshops for interpretation and translate any documents that needs to be translated in a specific language, Bilingual Guidance Counselors attend IEP meetings and are aware of the over-the-phone interpretation service. Several staff members offer their services for translation and are aware of the over-the-phone interpretation service. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Over-the-phone interpretation is a fast and reliable resource for interpretation. All staff members receive information on how to use the over-the-phone interpretation service. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 80  Staff members are asked to fill out a School Staff Language Survey. We have several Professional Developments throughout the school year to train and inform our staff. Over-the-Phone interpretation service with pass-code are placed in mailboxes several times throughout school year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All directories are placed on the front desk when parents enter the building. Information includes the website, phone number, and contacts. All information is translated in Spanish and available in other languages to support all parents of our community. In addition a parent bulletin board is set-up in the school's main entrance and displays a language assistant poster with information in different languages for language assistance, such that parents can identify on the poster which language they speak to communicate with our staff so that we can best support them. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Edwin Vargas, Parent Coordinator will conduct a semi annual evaluation survey of the content and effectiveness of the support provided to the parents with translation. The findings will be used to design additional strategies to more effectively meet the needs of the parents, and enhance the support of the Language Translation and Interpretation Plan. 2018-19 CEP 81 
