2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X237 School Name: THE MARIE CURIE SCHOOL FOR MEDICINE, NURSING, AND HEALTH PROFESSIONS RODNEY FISHER Principal: 2018-19 CEP 1  2018-19 CEP 2  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Marie Curie School for Medicine Nursing and Health Professions 321000011237 9-12 School Number (DBN): 10X237 120 West 231 st Street Bronx, NY 10463 718-432-6491 (718) 796-7051 Phone Number: Ronald Singh Fax: Email Address: rsingh7@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Rodney Fisher, Ed.D Patrick Childs Gloria Soto Leticia Browne Francis Osei RosemerryTorres ReshatKolloni N/A District Information Carron Staple Superintendent: One Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 741-5852 Phone Number: (718) 741 - 7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 4  FSC: Bronx Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: (718) 828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 5  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Rodney Fisher, Ed.D Patrick Childs Gloria Soto Gregory Bess Francis Osei Rosemerry Torres ReshatKolloni N/A Zachary Dane Ronald Singh Cynthia Mercedes Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member- Teacher Member- Assistant Principal Member/ PA Recording Secretary 2018-19 CEP 6 Signature (Blue Ink) Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ PA Member Co Vice - President LetichaBrown Mildred Robinson Member/ Parent Member / Parent Member / Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 7  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 8  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 9  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of The Marie Curie High School is to provide the students with an academically rigorous, college and career bound program while also preparing them for successful health related career within our community.. Each subject is infused with critical ideas, skills, and contemporary issues and values that are prominent in the health professions. In addition, the students have the opportunity to participate in experiential learning. 2018-19 CEP 10  Our theory of action centers around T.A.S.K. - talk and action equals success and knowledge. In our classrooms, students become engaged learners with agency to take action by endeavoring to make sense of ideas and actions through critical thinking, academic discourse, and meta cognition. To achieve this rigorous learning, teachers in their classrooms will include peer-peer discussions, writing as a thinking tool and production of robust writing and problem solving across content areas. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Marie Curie School for Medicine, Nursing, and Health Professions, located in the Kingsbridge section of the Bronx, is a small high school in its thirteenth year. The current population includes 494 students, 122 males and 372 females. This population is further broken down into 147 ninth graders, 130 tenth graders, 122 eleventh graders, and 95 twelfth graders. We have a total of 72 English Language Learners (14.67% of population) and 103 students who receive Special Education services (20.85% of population). The ethnic breakdown of the students is 307 Hispanics, 7 Native Americans, 9 Asian, 5 Hawaiian/Philippine Islands, 148 Black, and 17 White. All 494 are classified as economically disadvantaged. The Marie Curie School has a Cabinet that supports the goals and objectives of the school. The board consists of the principal, assistant principals, selected school staff, representatives from the Mosholu Montefiore Community Center, Lehman College, and participating hospitals including our lead health care facility - The New Jewish Home. Additionally, the 2018-20109 school focus continues to center around College Ready Literacy. Additionally, we will continue to build our AVID program helping shift learning to a more equitable, student centered approach. In Fall 2018, we begin our first courses in our new Career Technical Education (CTE) Nursing program implementation. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our Special student populations are English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Our English Language Learners comprise approximately 13% of our overall population. ENL student needs are unique in terms language acquisition and immersion is one of the primary goals of their education within our school setting. Language goals support students' ability to learn content specific material. Our Student with Special Needs population is historically 20% of our overall population. The vast majority of our students are classified as learning disabled and require additional scaffolds such as graphic organizers or specific note-taking strategies to support their learning. We have smaller number of students who are classified as emotionally disturbed or other health impaired. In general counselling is provided to our students who are classified as emotional disturbed and other health impaired students receive support from our school paraprofessionals as well. 2018-19 CEP 11  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As of June 29, 2018 the elements of the Framework for Great Schools that we made the most progress on are Rigorous Instruction and supportive Environment. 1. By June 2018 the percentage of students who pass the June 2018 Algebra I regents will increase by 5% compared to June 2017 exam results due to implementation of Common Assessments and Mastery-Based Feedback structures within all Algebra classes. June 2016 Regents exams indicate that 47% of students passed the exam (Including IEP pass results). A 5% increase would result in a 52% passing rate (including IEP pass results). Although we cannot say for absolute fact how students will perform on the June 2018 Algebra I regents we can compare data. Last year in January 2017 24% of students passed the January Algebra I Regents. In January 2018 56% of students passed the Algebra I Regents. This data indicates clear impact of changes that have occurred within math classrooms and math preparation for the Regents exams. 2. By June 2018 the percentage of suspensions that result from infractions coded as B36 and B39 will decrease by 5% compared to data from the 2016-2017 school year due to the implementation of the Circle Process as well as Restorative Practices as preventative measures. Last year we had 44 incidents that were reported as a B36 or a B39. Of those 44 incidents 25 resulted in suspension or 56%. Thus far for the 2017-2018 school year there have been 29 incidents that are labeled as either B36 or B39. Of this total 12 have resulted in some form of suspension. We are currently at 41% and on track to meet our goal. As we look forward to next year our areas of focus are Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership and Strong Family and Community Ties. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X237 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 489 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 27 26 8 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 78.0% % Attendance Rate 78.1% % Reduced Lunch 12.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.4% 62.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.25 2% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 75% 50% 55.1% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 119 122 4 83.4% 0.4% 21.5% 29.4% 2.9% 1.6% 4 17% 6.8 N/A N/A 64% 66% 79.6% 8% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Relative to Rigorous Instruction some strengths of our current instructional program include: 1) Daily Common Planning time (By Department) built into the schedule for teachers 2) A School-wide Common Annotation Strategy and movement towards incorporating more AVID school wide strategies 3) A common definition of Critical Thinking developed through whole staff development with LCI. 4) Common Assessment for Learning Tool-kits to provide actionable feedback to students, including a low inference note-taking system for teachers. Our Priority needs assessment included data analysis from the following data sources: Student Surveys, MOSL data, Teacher Surveys, and School Quality Guide Data. This data indicated that our students were not engaging with critical thinking by building on each others' ideas. It is for this reason that we have developed our goal for Rigorous instruction in this way By accomplishing this goal we are hoping to provide students with the skills necessary to engage in academic discourse that will support their learning within the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 14  By June 2019, through the implementation of WICOR Strategies, aligned to our instructional focus, we will increase student discussion, as evidenced by an increase of 6% (from 59% to 65%) of teachers who say that students build on each others’ ideas during class discussion on the School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Creation and implementation of on-going professional development cycles after school during Monday Professional Development sessions for all teachers around the Danielson component 3B- Questioning and Discussion Techniques. Creation of a student discussion rubric and protocol for implementation in small groups including student feedback around this process Use of advisory structures to help convey the importance of discussion as a learning tool and process. This work will be supported by the creation and implementation of advisory lesson plans for this purpose. Implementation of Talk days, based on our theory of action T.A.S.K = talk and action equal success and knowledge, for our 9th and 11th grades that will be supported by our Avid curriculum. These days will be focused on tasks and activities such as Socratic Seminar, Philosophical Chairs, and others from the Avid Curriculum. All teachers September 2018- June 2019 Administration, all teachers, all students All ENL and Student with Disability Students September 2018- June 2019 Administration, all teachers, all students, Guidance staff, advisories All Students September 2018- June 2019 Administration, all teachers, advisory staff Students in Year 1 and Year 3 courses September 2018- June 2019 Administration, all teachers, all students, guidance staff, paraprofessionals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of these structures and students progress through monthly parent newsletters. Parents will be informed of their students' performance via the Pupilpath grading and communication system. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, Professional Development time, Per session funding for creation of rubrics, mailing resources for parent outreach, use of the Pupil Path/ Skedula system. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 16  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 the positive response rate to the question: Do students build on each others ideas within class will increase by 3% to reach 62% as measured by in house surveys that mimic the school learning environment survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Marie Curie High School created in house surveys. School Learning Environment Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Relative to Supportive Environment some strengths of our current instructional program include: 1) We currently have multiple members on staff that are trained in Life Space Crisis Intervention 2) Our school ladder of referral aligns to and accentuates the needs of restorative practices in combination with disciplinary measures. 3) The school implements an advisory system once a week as a structure to support students both socio-emotionally and academically. 4) We are in the process of accepting additional social work interns to assist in providing support structures of students that may be identified as in crisis. 5) We are partnered with RAPP to provide additional counseling services t students around positive and responsible relationships. Our Priority needs assessment included data analysis the following data sources: Student Surveys, MOSL data, Teacher Surveys, and School Quality Guide Data. The priority needs that we seek to address through successful completion of this goal are according to the school learning environment survey 72% of our student population do not believe that teachers support them when they are upset. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 18  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through regular student feedback and implementation of socio-emotional professional development cycles, the positive response rate to the question on the School Survey that asks students if their teachers support them when they are upset will increase by 12% (from 28% to 40%). 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Implementation of a school wide advisory group structure that will service at least 75% of our student population with socio-emotional learning and academics All Students September 2018- June 2019 Creation of Professional Development series to help staff identify signs that students are upset and provide strategies to help all staff members respond to students in a manner that fosters positive relationships among students and staff members. These meetings will happen during Tuesday time as part of Other Professional Work All Students September 2018- June 2019 once a month Administration of small bi-monthly in house surveys of students to determine trends in regards to feeling supported by staff when they are upset. These polls will be cycled so that each class period is polled at least twice within the course of each semester All Students September 2018- June 2019 Adminstration, CBO partners, Teachers, Social Workers, LCI trained staff. Adminstration, Teachers, CBO partners, Social Workers, LCI trained staff. Adminstration, teachers, CBO partners, Social Workers, LSCI trained staff. Increase the number of Life Space Crisis Intervention (LSCI) and Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCI) trained staff by 50% (from 6 to 9) by June 2019 Students with Special Needs September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and Teachers Students with Special Needs and ENL students September 2018- June 2019 Administration, teachers, School Aides, Paraprofessionals, Social Workers, Guidance Counselors, LSCI trained staff. Implement Tuesday after school kid-talk meetings with weekly focus on students in the following categories: Week 1: Students with IEP's - Including DTORF Assessments Week 2: ENL students Week 3: Students in Crisis/Attendance Issues Week 4: Students in Academic Jeopardy (not in other groups) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 20  Structuring our 75 minutes of other professional work time to include 50 minutes of kid talk time followed by 25 minutes of structured phone conversations will allow staff members to communicate with families in an informed manner regarding multiple subject areas. In addition regular progress reports through the IO Education Skedula system will be sent home in order to keep families aware of student success or needs for support. Each of the meetings concerning individual students will be documented via the Skedula anecdotal system. Further, the Marie Curie High School may add additional features to our attendance taking and skedula ancedotal system so that parents are notified directly via SMS-text messaging with regards to student attendance and ancedotals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Life Space Crisis Intervention System trained staff members, social workers, guidance counselors, AVID advisory curriculum, College Board Advisory curriculum, social work interns from Manhattan and Lehman Colleges. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 35% of students polled will indicate positive responses in regards to the question: Teachers support students when they are upset as measured by school created in-house surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Learning Environment Survey and School created in house learning environment surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Relative to Collaborative Teachers some strengths of our current instructional program include: 1. Common Planning Time for all teachers via department on a daily basis. 2. Common Unit Planning and Lesson Planning Exemplars for use by all staff 3. Common Instructional Procedures for AFL strategies as well as literacy annotation. Our Priority needs assessment included data analysis the following data sources: Student Surveys, MOSL data, Teacher Surveys, and School Quality Guide Data. Our area of need relative to this goal is that our courses are not completely vertically aligned and therefore missing on opportunities to build student skills in logical ways thereby promoting college readiness goals. By achieving this goal we hope to achieve better alignment of course curriculum and teaching strategies so that there is a logical build in student skills and content knowledge as students progress throughout their high school career. In addition we hope that the alignment of scaffolds and skills can lead to greater success for students in answering open-ended short response and essay questions when taking regents examinations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through regular vertical level meetings and implementation of school wide WICOR strategies from the AVID curriculum, there will be 7% increase (from 58% to 65%) in positive responses on the School Survey that asks teachers if they believe curriculum is aligned across grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 22  2018-19 CEP 23 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? June 2018 to June 2019 Students with Disabilities and ENL students 9th Grade Students August 2018 to June 2019 All 9th Grade Students September 2018- June 2019 All Teachers, Administrators, College and Career Counselors, SIT Team Members, CBO's. All teachers, Guidance Counselors All Teachers, Administrators Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Creation of vertically aligned content goals in each content area beginning with 12th grade skill and content goals and working backwards to develop each grade below 12th grade. Identification of students to use as longitudinal case studies to align curriculum and pedagogical strategies for the purpose of ensuring student needs are met. Aligning to Action Plan item number 2 MCHS will work to create common planning meetings on a weekly basis by department during which teachers will analyze strategies that support student learning for individuals within the case study groups. Case study groups will be comprised of 1 student from each grade as identified by the categories below. Case Study Group 1: Students with IEPs Case Study Group 2: ENL Students Case Study Group 3: Minority Males Case Study Group 4: Bottom Third Students. Creation of common assessment developed collaboratively in department teams that spiral information and ensure all courses are aligned to common goals. All Core Content Teachers July 2018 - June 2019 All Teachers, Administrators, CBO partners 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged through bi-monthly news letters to inform parents of the work being done to align our curriculum and instruction. In addition we will engage families by providing them information regarding their child's 2018-19 CEP 24  individual goals based on the school curriculum alignment goals and request that parents actively take part in monitoring their students' progress as well. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per-Session for Planning Work, Professional Development time during Monday. Common planning for co-teachers (daily) built into schedule. Purchase of AVID curriculum and Professional Development in Summer 2018. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 teacher positive responses to in house surveys regarding vertical alignment of content and courses will increase by 4% from 58% to 62%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Learning Environment Survey, MCHS In house Learning Environment Survey, Bi-monthly parent surveys (sent home). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Relative to Effective School Leadership some strengths of our current instructional program include: 1) Well Developed Ratings for the 2017-2018 MOLP in areas of Goal-Setting, High Expectations, Montoring and Revising , and resource allocation. 2) Daily Common Planning Time for content area teacher teams 3) Existence of a functioning Committee, including AVID Teacher Leaders, with the goal of ensuring critical thinking in all classrooms which directly relates to Effective Instructional Practice according to the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 4) Emerging Teacher Leader AP from acceptance to compliment well developed score of high expectations and resource allocation Our Priority needs assessment included data analysis the following data sources: Student Surveys, MOSL data, Teacher Surveys, and School Quality Guide Data. An analysis of this data revealed teacher dissatisfaction with our PD series in terms of allowing time for teachers to experiment with ideas presented during PD Through successful attainment of this goal we hope to address the following prioritized areas of need - Rigorous professional development program around school initiatives to allow for continued teacher development and an effective school Leadership rating to continue to steadily increase - 1.97 (2016-17), 2.62 (2017-18) according to Learning Environment Survey Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through implementation of coherent professional development cycles, there will be a 6% increase (from 64% to 70%) in positive responses on the School Survey that asks teachers if their professional development 2018-19 CEP 26  experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try and evaluate new ideas. 2018-19 CEP 27 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff (including teachers, paras, support staff) August 2018- June 2019 September 2018-May 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Instructional Committee, Mentors, Teacher's College Collaborating Partners Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator BFSC Staff, Administration, Teachers All Teachers, Administration, Teacher Leader Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Targeted professional dvelopment to address specific development of individual teacher needs Creation of a Observation Calendar for regular feedback, with all MOTP required observations to be complete by April 2018 All teachers BFSC Professional Development Opportunities for teachers to address specific content area needs All teachers Intervisitation and Inquiry Cycles by Department beginning in October 2017 to provide feedback on practices. All teachers October 2018- May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Creation of Class specific Parent Surveys will provide teachers with opportunities to provide feedback on specific classes and student needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session to allow for overages and classroom inter visitation, common planning time built into the schedule. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 28  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018 there will be a 5% increase in the number of teachers trending towards Effective or Highly Effective according to Advance MOTP Score Trackers. Currently using an overall MOTP average of 2.51 20 out of 33 teachers are on track to receive an overall rating of Effective. That is 60%. This figure is 7% below our end of year results for 2016-2017. In order to reach our goal of 72% effective 24 of our 33 teachers must obtain overall ratings of effective as per MOTP guidelines. At present 9 teachers are less than .50 points away from an Effective Rating. 4 teachers are more than .50 points away from an effective rating. In addition the areas of the Danielson Framework that are the most challenging for staff to earn effective ratings in are as follows: 3B- 2.15 3D - 2.25 1E- 2.35 3C - 2.41 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance MOTP Score Trackers Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Relative to Strong Family and Community Ties some strengths of our current instructional program include: 1) Multiple Collaborating Partners who provide services and programs for student and parent participation. 2) Acceptance into the NYCDOE CTE Program to help further stated School Mission and Vision and provide families with engaging programs as a result. 3) Parent Coordinator on staff. Our Priority needs assessment included data analysis the following data sources: Student Surveys, MOSL data, Teacher Surveys, and School Quality Guide Data. By successfully achieving this goal we hope to address the following prioritized needs: 1) 2016-2017 Learning Environment score of 2.35, a drop of .67 points from the previous school year. 2) More parent involvement in the regular functioning of the school- including after school activities and initiatives. 3) 60% rate of parent participation in at least one family engagement activity for the 2016-2017 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to heighten student awareness of health careers, by June 2019, The Marie Curie High School will facilitate the implementation of health fairs and other experiential learning in health related fields that will be open to all members of the school community. Thirty-percent (30%) of the school community will attend at least one of these health fairs or experiential learning opportunities. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Partnership Open House Presentations during First Parent/Teacher Conference (September 28, 2018). Reimplementation of advisory trips and community based projects during the 2018-2019school year All Parents, Students and Staff September 28, 2018 Administration/ Parent Coordinator/Teachers All Parents, All students, and staff September 2018- June 2019 All Advisors, Administration, Parent Coordinator Regular Parent Meetings to be held outside of the Marie Curie Building. Alternate Locations can include activities to occur after the official meeting All Parents and Staff Incentivize parent involvement for students through sustainable monthly awards. All Parents and Students Collaborate with Mentoring in Medicine, Dr. Lynn Holden, to facilitate a 4 hour 1 day Health Fair in the Fall semester. All Parents and Students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator Administration, Parent Coordinator Administration, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Montefirore Moshulu Community Center, Morris Heights Health Clinic, NYU Langhone.. The administration, parent coordinator, and Coordinator of Student Affairs, Ms. Jacqueline Davis, works with these institutions to provide services to our parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session for Teacher Involvement in parent Activities outside of contractual hours. Budget Lines for MMCC collaborating partner. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 the total number of families enrolled in or who attend MCHS school related events will increase by 2%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign In sheets from events and activities. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who have scored below the median scaled score for a level 2 and Level 3 as defined by NYSEDAIS Memo Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Achieve 3000 Adaptive Reading Program, Resource Room, Small Group Instruction. One to One Conferencing Students who have scored below the median scaled score for a level 2 and Level 3 as defined by NYSEDAISMemo Students who score below a median scaled score of a 2 and 3 on the latest state Science Assessment Students who score below a median scaled score of a 2 and 3 on the latest state Science Assessment Students are identified by the crisis team and Guidance department on an individual basis based on student data both Small Group Instruction, One to One Tutoring, Regents Prep Classes, One to One Conferencing Small Group Instruction, One to One Tutoring, Regents Prep Classes, One to One Conferencing Small Group Instruction, One to One Tutoring, Regents Prep Classes, One to One Conferencing Individual counselling, Group Counselling, Mandated Counselling, Riverdale Mental Health Clinic, Morris Heights Health Clinic. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group, one to one, and tutoring Small Group, one to one, and tutoring During the School Day and after the School Day. In addition Saturday Academy. Afterschool for ELL students. During and after the School Day, In addition Saturday Academy Small Group, one to one, and tutoring During the School Day,Afterschool Small Group, one to one, and tutoring During the School Day,Afterschool Small Group and One-to One. During the School Day, Afterschool, Summer. 2018-19 CEP 33  academic and social/emotional Outside Referral Agencies 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 51 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling, Outreach, Computer Hours, Extended Time Services. Provision of basic emergency supplies such as Uniforms, school supplies, books, snacks, etc. Counselling open office hours just for STH students Monday and Tuesday morning from 8:00am to 9:00am. Library supplies and resources in room 525 for STH students. Referrals provided for optical and medical services through hitesite.org. The STH students will be administered the SMALSI Assessment with interventions. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Staff is hired via a hiring committee to ensure many members of the School Community have input into who joins the community. Rigorous questions are developed via the Hiring Committee and candidates are screened via HR Personnel Yissel Martinez. Professional Development Committee also request and at times design PD based on staff and student needs assessments to ensure staff is highly qualified to service our students. Such PD includes Literacy Strategies on School Wide Annotation and Coding presented by Columbia Teacher's College. In addition the school is contracting with the Learning Center Initiative to assist with Professional Development around Feedback and Questioning and Discussion Techniques. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development is aligned to Instructional Core Competencies within the Danielson Framework and CCSS. This ongoing professional learning community in service is based on evidence of teacher need and is refined via a teacher feedback system for improved PD opportunities. Staff is also given as many opportunities as possible to see quality teaching strategies within other school communities and return those ideas to The Marie Curie School Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 37  Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. On going professional development on the effective use of assessments in the classroom is provided to small groups of students. In addition Assessments are regularly addressed as part of the evaluative an support process. Assessments are commonly planned within a subject area and samples of student work are evaluated via the ATLAS protocol by department staff members. Department Chairs have been identified for each of the 4 major content areas. These staff members work with Administration to create goals for each department- one of which is involving assessment. In addition the school is contracting with the Learning Center Initiative to assist with Professional Development around Feedback and Questioning and Discussion Techniques. Although the school espouses the use of AFL strategies teachers are encouraged to choose multiple assessment options from that menu. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 404,790.00 X 2018-19 CEP 38 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) sect 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 12,366.00 0 3,610,768.00 x X x X sect 5A sect 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 2018-19 CEP 39  purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Marie Curie School for Medicine, Nursing, and The Health Professions, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Marie Curie School for Medicine, Nursing, and The Health Professions will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Marie Curie School for Medicine, Nursing, and The Health Professions in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 43  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Our Title III ENL program strives to improve the English speaking, listening, reading and writing skills of our English Language learners. Our direct instruction program will service 34 9-12th grade students classified as entering (19), emerging (5), or transitioning (10). The students will participate in either After school and/or Saturday program with one- two ENL certified teacher(s) weekly for two hours on Wednesday or Thurdsay from 2:40p.m. to 4:40 p.m. for 28 weeks from October through mid June or for three hours from 9:00am -12:00pm on 26 Saturdays during the same time period. This will be about 134 hours @ 55.23 per hour for a total of $7,400.82 which is right at the allocation limit for 60% of the overall funding designated for direct Instruction. As we evaluate our current ENL support services we find that it is ever more important (especially with changes to NYSESLAT testing) to provide students with clear linkages to the instruction they see inside the class and scaffold supports they can use to help themselves understand the information that is being communicated. It is for this reason that we will focus on content area topics and how to appropriately use ENL scaffolds to support the learning that is meant to take place. The language of instruction will be English. The materials used will include course materials from the academic programs for ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies including scaffolded materials such as chunked text, highlights or bold words, and school wide organizational schemas such as Cornell Notes. Each session will focus on a particular subject area so that academic language within the context of the subject area can also be addressed. Other than print materials we also regularly utilize the research based program Achieve 3000 to support student learning of main idea through non-fiction based articles. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: The 10% of the overall allocation, which amounts to $1,236 will be used to assist teachers in learning techniques and strategies that will be incorporated as school wide structures to aide the learning of our ENL students. Approximately $1,200 will be utilized to help train key teachers in each of the content areas included both of our ENL teachers in methodologies to support entering and emerging ENL students. This training will be conducted by Dr. Catherine Box from Teacher’s College at Columbia University. We will pay for a cycle of 4 separate dates during 2018-19 CEP 48  Lesson Plans Materials Schema Input/Output Directions Assessments providing illustrations to complement text. Tasks &nbsp;(see attached sheet) using resources to adjust text to another level. providing glossary of vocabulary terms. enhancing grammar points or specialized terms through using boldface or having students Part C: Professional Development which Professor Box will work with Department heads and ENL teachers to develop instructional supports for our ENL students. This information will be rolled out in professional development cycles for content area teams during the 80 minute Monday after school Professional Development as well as other times after school hours. Dr. Catherine Box's travel to be included. Topic to be covered include: What Can We Differentiate for ELLs? · ENL teachers integrate content and language objectives. · Content and ENL teachers work together to adapt materials for content areas, including: · · · underline pertinent items (depending on language objective). · · Can be done by the content teacher and ENL teacher. · Activation&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; · · · Can be done by the content teacher and the ENL teacher, in collaboration or alone. · This is best done in collaboration with ENL teacher. · · STRATEGIES FOR WORKING WITH ELLs: TASK-LEVEL SCHEMA ACTIVATION · mind. · DIFFERENTIATION OF INPUT/OUTPUT · (visuals, dramatization, review, questions, think-pair-shares). · use in different contexts, write on board, highlight when using it, have students repeat it, give opportunities for students to use it). · simultaneously). · task. · verbal contributions, and group task monitoring. · Giving opportunities to do multiple drafts, providing teacher feedback. Providing checklists for peer or self assessment. Prepare students for tasks by activating background knowledge with an asset perspective in Provide rich contextual information for tasks (visuals, glossaries, background). Provide multiple opportunities for students to process information in multiple ways Use abundancy and redundancy strategies when introducing key vocabulary. (repeat often, Ask instruction-clarifying questions (e.g. what do we do first?) before setting students on Ensure participation of all students through providing sentence frames, allowing non-Include sentence frames/stems to support students as they engage with written language. Adding language goals (related to language objective), either to the rubric or separately. Provide multimodal directions/explanations (modeling, gestures, write &amp; say 2018-19 CEP 49  rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Family Engagement is crucial to consistent student success. In order for that engagement to occur parents must be provided with access to their child’s educational goals and progress. However, mandated meetings during Parent-Teacher Conferences are not enough when the learning curve is so steep. Communal meetings will be held to include snacks (i.e. water, cookies) to families. The 10% allocation for Family Engagement activities will be primarily used to support structured progress monitoring conversations 3 times during the school year, in addition to the mandated conference evenings. The 10% funding will be used to fund per-session work related to these meetings for each of our 2 ENL teachers for a total of 22 hours at $55.23 per hour. This equates to a total of $1215.06 to also include but not limited to review of the students’ academic progress via transcripts and progress towards their language objectives via NYSESLAT, and next steps, and supports available for the family outside of the school setting. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 2018-19 CEP 50 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name The Marie Curie High School Borough Bronx School Number 237 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Peta-Gaye Williams Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Richelle Jurasek Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area Patrick Childs/ELA Related-Service Provider Tanya Dale Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Ronald Singh Coach AP Jason Maass School Counselor Jessica Edwards Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 498 2018-19 CEP 52 Total number of ELLs 115 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.09%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For entering students we utilize the NYSITELL and teacher created Assessments, including an interview and a reading test. We also use an online adaptive program called Achieve 3000. This provides us with skill levels in writing, reading, and speaking. We also have interpreted the ELA Beginning of Year Student Assessments to gather student data . In addition students also take mock small scale NYSELAT exams to test proficiency 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have Free Standing ENL classes during which Achieve 3000 is utilized. In addition we have an Achieve 3000 schedule built into all ELA classes which ENL students attend. The entire school took the Beginning of Year ELA Assessment for the purpose of data gathering. 2018-19 CEP 53  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The administrative team reviews all the data from formal and informal assessments, using reports from Stars, datacation, ATS, report cards and transcripts, and observations to evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs. We monitor our success based on End Line Assessments in the NYSELAT. In addition we follow student progress via our adaptive program with Achieve 3000 which provides updates and reports on growth in reading level. Based on current data areas of need include student's proficiency with reading. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Using our new IEP Teacher position we will provide AIS services for smaller groups of students in pull out setting. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Programming decisions are based on student performance on the NYSELAT, Achieve 3000 Data, Beginning of Year ELA data and Regents exam scores. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our Achieve 3000 Liason sends regular reports to the classroom teachers as well as to administration in order to disseminate this information. Individualized student reports are also shared with students on a regular basis. Our AP in charge of Programming also reviews student test scores to ensure appropriate placement. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Depending on their Proficiency level students are programmed for either an ICT model or integrated instruction in ELA and also Free Standing ENL services. . Services are provided by content area teachers and ENL teachers. Students classified as Entering and Emerging also receive standalone instruction in ENL from ENL teachers. The flexible minutes are used to increase the number of minutes students receive in each ICT and standalone section to 180 mins for each subject they receive ENL support services in. Students are heterogeneously grouped within these programs in order to provide them with access and exposure to the language. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 54  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In addition to ELA core classes provided by a licensed content area teacher students receive required periods of ENL standalone instruction from an ENL certified teacher. An ENL teacher co-teaches with a certified ELA techer to provide the 180 minutes of integrated ENL minutes. Entering Students receive 180 minutes of instruction in Integrated ENL/ELA and 360 minutes of stand alone ENL. Emerging Students receive 180 minutes of instruction in Integrated ENL/ELA and 360 minutes of stand alone ENL. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of instruction in integrated ENL/ELA Exanding students receive 180 minutes of instruction in an integrated co teaching model in ELA. Commanding students receive 180 minutes of instruction in an integrated co teaching model in ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In ENL and ELA and all subject classes content is delivered in the English Language. Small group instruction and multiple entry points through visual, kinestetic, and auditory learning are utilized to make the language comprehensible. Small group instruction is used to maximize time and decrease teacher student ratios increase the amount of individualized time a teacher can spend with students. Project based learning is used to place learning in context and use multiple communication skills. Teachers work on language objectives, changing them as skills develop and growth occurs coupled with academic objectives. They use academic supports, including graphic organizers, chunking the text, adapting the text, using the text page (bold print, captions, pictures/photos/diagrams, headings, subheadings, italics), low level high interest companion non-fiction selections, recorders/players, peer partners, small groups for guided instruction, flexible grouping, vocabulary development, strategies for understanding (context clues, cognates, visual aides/equipment, video clips on smartboards for visual clues, 4-corner activities, activities to build listening, speaking, reading, writing skills, taking into account the appropriate levels for the activities, responses, skills, and types of scaffolding for various activities. Lessons are project based and include debates, following the Socratic Seminar model, readings using the 7 Habits of a Good Reader, and writings, using the writing workshop model. We use various strategies to support and scaffold student learning, including predicting, identifying main ideas, previewing vocabulary, quickwrites, partnering in jigsaw activities, utilizing graphic organizers and visual aids. Content areas are co-taught by teachers certified in those subject specific areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We use benchmark assessments and utilize Achieve 3000 as an on going assessment tool throughout the year. We administer the home language survey at the beginning of the year and follow regulations for home language instruction as designated by our ENL program 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction for all students is differentiated after a needs assessment is done. Then students are given additional support after school as a form of differentiation as well as through the use of leveled texts and adaptive computer programs in Achieve 3000. Instructional technology is used to create an adaptive learning environment. See above - #3 for specific strategies/skills/supports incorporated into the instructional activities for all ELLs, appropriate to the students' levels. Teachers embed co-teacher models to be used in the lesson. For this reason Long Term ELLs may be provided with a variety of instructional methods to help them visualize content and also process text. Newcomer ELLs are provided with more direct instruction through the standalone ENL program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 CEP 55  Videos for flipped Classroom Instruction, language translators, graphic organizers for essay writing. Small group instruction and peer-peer interaction is emphasized to have students verbally express and justify their ideas. As they do with all ELLs, teachers work on language objectives, changing them as skills develop and growth occurs coupled with academic objectives. They use academic supports, including graphic organizers, chunking the text, adapting the text, using the text page (bold print, captions, pictures/photos/diagrams, headings, subheadings, italics), low level high interest companion non-fiction selections, recorders/players, peer partners, small groups for guided instruction, flexible grouping, vocabulary development, strategies for understanding (context clues, cognates, visual aides/equipment, video clips on smartboards for visual clues, 4-corner activities, activities to build listening, speaking, reading, writing skills, taking into account the appropriate levels for the activities, responses, skills, and types of scaffolding for various activities. The ENL teachers work with the SE teachers and support the students in meeting their IEP goals. Both discipline literacy and ecological framework are factors that affect a student's performance which are addressed in the ENL instructional practices. Good instructional practices benefit all students, so the ENL supports are used in conjunction with IEP mandates and supports to increase success for ELL-SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ENL teachers are scheduled in stand alone ENL classes and content area classes to create greater flexibility in teacher and student programming. Our ENL teachers will be working with both content area and special education teachers, both in planning and in direct instruction in ICT and self-contained classrooms. IEP goals and language objectives will be shared and emphasized in in planning and supporting ELLs with disabilities. In addition, students will benefit from peer partnerships with EP students with & without disabilities and ELLs without disabilities. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Currently our targeted intervention programs include ENL teachers for push-in support in core content areas including ICT and self-contained SE classrooms, small group instruction by subgroups and by language levels in after school and Saturday programs and opportunities for ELLs to participate with IEPs in Regents prep and benefit from peer support/tutoring. We also use Castle Learning both in-class and for homework and study/test prep purposes which benefit our ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As part of the upcoming school year Push-in Collaborative Teaching models in Content areas with ENL support will help in the transference of skills from the stand alone classes to the content area classes. We will also be using some additional on-line/computer assisted programs in our in class and after-school/Saturday programs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There is no TBE program as per parent choice and you do not have the 20 ELLs that speak the same language in one grade. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. There are afterschool ELL skills development workshops specifically for ELLs. In additon there is support for Regents exam preparation for all students including ELLs. We also have recreational programs open to all students, including ELLs, which give ELLs the opportunity to interact with other students and use their communications skills in non-judgemental situations. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Dictionaries, Laptops, Smartboards in every classroom, audio devices such as boom boxes and headphones for books on tape/CD. We use Aventa on-line learning, Achieve3000, CastleLearning to support our ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 56  Our only program is ENL. Our teachers have informed us that within ENL the instruction must be provided in English; however, we do have an alternate language para who provides language support for students with IEPs. In addition, we use subject specific glossaries, as well as dictionaries in content area classrooms. We offer the students Regents exams in other languages in various content areas. Students have opportunities to use support materials from the Internet in translation. We do have bilingual staff members who are available to provide translations, verbal or written when needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Periodic department meetings are used to ensure compliance with support services. Administration does formal and informal observations, as well as walkthroughs, to observe classroom practices and monitor compliance. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Although our school shares a building we do not share space. We have provide the supports and interventions our students need from our staff alone. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Guidance Conferences with Administration and Guidance counselors are held. During these meetings our Parent Coordinator facilitates translation services so that we can assist the students in beginning a productive year. All students are assigned an advisor and weekly advisory periods take place where the new ELLs can interact with other students and get support from peers and the advisor. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? there is no Dual Language Program Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Training in Achieve 3000. Training around using the Equiprubric to align curriclum to Common Core, Staff Development in components 3B, 3C, and 3D from Danielson. Training will be given on portfolio development and data analysis via the Atlas Protocol. Non-Pedegogical staff also participate in staffwide trainings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 57  We hold biannunal staff meetings around the needs and goals for our ELL students. Monthly Department meetings and out of the building training are used as the primary vehicle for ESL specific professional development. We also utilize out of the building PDs presented by the BFSC, that are later turnkeyed to other staff in order to meet these requirements. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Marie Curie High School plans to structure individualized parent / guardian meetings to best support our ELL parent / guardian community during our 40 minute parent involvement structured time on Tuesdays. ELL parents/ guardians will be invited on Tuesdays to meet with our ENL teachers to discuss their child's individual needs. If parents cannot come in physically then a phone conference may be held instead. Individualized meetings will be documented through a parent - teacher sign in sheet that will detail the agenda items that are discussed throughout the meeting. Parent - Teacher sign in sheets, parent /guardian outreach and other pertinent documents will be kept on file in a binder. On -site Spanish translation services will be provided to ELL parent / guardians. The Department of Education Language and Interpretation Unit will utilized in the event that a language other than Spanish is needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Marie Curie High School provides our parent/ guardian community at large with different opportunities to become actively involved in their child's academic education. This inclusive environment includes, but is not limited to the following: monthly Parent Association meetings and School Leadership Team Meetings which offer parents the opportunity to voice their ideas and concerns, individualized parent / guardian meetings with ENL teachers to discuss their child's needs and offer parents support, school website that allows parents/ guardians to access and track their child's academic progress and communicate with teachers in their native language, workshops specifically organized around best support practices and meet the needs of our ELL student and parent/ guardian community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rodney Fisher, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Marie Curie School for Med School DBN: 10X237 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Peta-Gaye Williams Title Principal Ronald Singh Assistant Principal N/A Parent Coordinator Richelle Jurasek ENL/Bilingual Teacher Margarite Brown Parent n/a Teacher/Subject Area Patrick Childs Teacher/Subject Area AP: Jason Maass n/a Coach Coach Jessica Edwards School Counselor Carron Staple Anita Bushi Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Bronx Tanya Dale Other Related Services Vacant Vacant Other n/A Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X237 School Name: The Marie Curie High School Superintendent: CarronStaple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Deborah Agosto Parent Coordinator No N * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In keeping with our parent involvement practices, we assess our parent/ guardian communities’ home language through the implementation of the following: The NYC Department of Education Parent / Guardian Home Language Identification Survey is administered once a student and their family enter our school community. The survey allows our school community to identify a family’s preferred language for both written and oral communication. A Language Identification Guide provided by the NYC Department of Education’s Translation and Interpretation Unit is visibly placed in the school’s main office to help school staff identify the language of limited – English –proficient parent/guardians and guests. Once the parent / guardians language is identified a call is placed to the NYC Dept. of Education’s Translation and Interpretation Unit for over the phone translation and interpretation services. 2018-19 CEP 61  The utilization of the Department of Education’s Blue Emergency cards allow us to identify and update a family’s preferred language of communication whether written, oral or both. Emergency blue cards are gathered in the beginning of each school year and updated on a continuous basis throughout the school year. They are also used to update the ATS system so that the RAPL report can be printed and serve as a quick reference for school personnel to identify a parent's home language. ) 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Afrikaans Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese English French Fulani Mandinka Soninke Spanish Twi Urdu 1 3 6 7 1 329 1 2 2 2 187 3 1 0.2% 0.5% 1.1% 1.3% 0.2% 60.4% 0.2% 0.4% 0.4% 0.4% 34.3% 0.5% 0.2% 1 3 6 7 1 329 1 2 2 2 187 3 1 0.2% 0.5% 1.1% 1.3% 0.2% 60.4% 0.2% 0.4% 0.4% 0.4% 34.3% 0.5% 0.2% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 62  Beginning of School Year Policies: Dress Code, Blue Cards, Student/Parent Handbook School Calendar on a monthly basis detailing academic and extracurricular programs Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. These documents are translated into Spanish during August by our Parent Coordinator. Beginning of Each Month These documents are translated into Spanish by our Parent Coordinator. Parent Teacher Conference Announcements 4 Times per year Parent Meet and Greet Night announcement September DOE Announcements Disseminated in Time frame specified by DOE. Notification translated for parents via school messenger as well as paper announcement translated by parent coordinator Notification translated for parents via school messenger as well as paper announcement translated by parent coordinator Language specific copies are printed from the DOE website, where available. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide New Student Orientation August 30, 2017 Welcome Back Meet and Greet September 28, 2017 Parent Teacher Conference November 9-10, 2017 interpretation service(s)? Through the use of our parent coordinator as well as through department of education translation services for other lower incident languages Through the use of our parent coordinator as well as through department of education translation services for other lower incident languages Through the use of our parent coordinator as well as through department of education translation services for other lower incident languages 2018-19 CEP 63  Parent Teacher Conference March 8-9, 2018 Parent Teacher Conference May 3, 2018 AP Night April 2018 IEP Night October 2017 School Leadership Team Monthly September 2017- June 2018 Through the use of our parent coordinator as well as through department of education translation services for other lower incident languages Through the use of our parent coordinator as well as through department of education translation services for other lower incident languages Through the use of our parent coordinator as well as through department of education translation services for other lower incident languages Through the use of our parent coordinator as well as through department of education translation services for other lower incident languages Through the use of our parent coordinator as well as through department of education translation services for other lower incident languages 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency we utilize our school messenger which sends out translated messages. We also have our parent coordinator and other Spanish speaking staff reach out to the 187 families via phone and email. In addition our school utilizes IO Education Skedula/Pupilpath which is able to send out email and text message communication in 26 languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Marie Curie High School will ensure that our staff is aware of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 through the following methods: 2018-19 CEP 64  A copy of this regulation will be included in a beginning of year notification given to all teachers, for which their signature is required. Professional Development will be provided by Administration, Guidance, and the Parent Coordinator regarding appropriate methods of Translation services. If additional professional development is necessary we will request a staff wide training to be held on a Monday afterschool, consistent with staff contracts, from the Language and Translation Unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our School Community will fulfill our parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services through the implementation of the following: A welcome poster received from the Language & Interpretation Unit will be posted in our schools main entrance. Parent Bill of rights and parents’ Guide to Language Access will be distributed to parents /guardians during: In-coming 9th grade parent / guardian orientation in August/September 2016 Parent Meet and Greet Night in September 2017 Parent – Teacher Conferences in November 2017 Parent – Teacher Conferences in March 2018 Parent - Teacher Conferences in May 2018 Copies of the Parents’ Bill of Rights will be posted in the main office Our Language ID Guide will be posted in the main office and at security desk to be able to identify parent / guardian preferred language. We ensure that all of our documents are translated in Spanish and will also use microsoft word to translate the documents our other required languages. We also will send this information directly via Pupilpath, from IO education that translates these documents into the parent's preferred language based on ATS information. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 2018-19 CEP 65  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback on the quality and availability of services will be gathered from our parent / guardian community through our yearly school survey and through an internal school based survey given during parent - teacher meetings. These systems will enable us to monitor our efficiency in meeting the language needs of our non - English speaking families. We will include a bi-annual survey to parents of limited English proficiency in November and in March to revise our policies as necessary 2018-19 CEP 66 
