2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X250 School Name: EXIMIUS COLLEGE PREPARATORY ACADEMY: A COLLEGE BOARD SCHOOL Principal: JONATHAN DALY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Eximius College preparatory academy 09x250 320900011250 9-12 School Number (DBN): 1363 Fulton Avenue, Bronx, NY 10456 718-992-7154 718-293-0308 Phone Number: LakishaStokes Fax: Email Address: lstokes2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 09 Dr. Jonathan P. Daly Shawn Tedrow Natalia Leon Eric Loewenberg Natalia Leon Jeremiah Besay Jocelyn Morales n/a District Information MichaelAlcoff Superintendent: Taft Educational Campus 240 East 172, Room 133 Bronx, NY 10457 Superintendent’s Office Address: 2018-19 CEP 3  MAlcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-741-7776 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Dr. Jonathan P. Daly Eric Loewenberg Natalia Leon Javier Negron MarianelaArauz Jocelyn Morales Jeremiah Besay MarleilyVargas America Cabral Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to develop high-achieving students of good character who use academic, technological, and social skills to inspire others, succeed in college, and accede to positions of social power that advance their community and the broader nation. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Over the last four years, we have worked to create a positive tone and climate in our school. Our students wear full uniforms and we have implemented security and behavior protocols. Our students have a clearer understanding of what it means to be a part of their school community as they volunteer both within the school and the community. At this point, we are deepening our work on building the college and career readiness of our students and getting more of our students to the graduation stage on time for both high school and college. We are modifying the culture we have to fit the needs of our students. Based on our school’s previous college matriculation reports, we realized that as a school community we must make changes to have students accepted to the country’s top colleges and universities. As a result of our outreach with New York University (NYU), 12 of our students have received full scholarships to this institution. Meaningful objectives, academic intervention services, and benchmarks need to continue to be in place so that students will graduate. Students also need to have a voice in their college and career readiness plan. Students should be able to articulate their areas of difficulty and how they learn best so instruction can be differentiated. ● We partner with CFES (College For Every Student) in order to achieve this goal. We were awarded with the CFES “School of Distinction Award” for the 2017-2018 school year. Monitoring needs to begin in the 9 th grade. The college and career plans of our students need to be assessed and re-evaluated on a yearly basis. The 9 th graders will fill in college applications in their social studies classes. These applications will be reviewed by CFES and then students will continue with this work throughout high school. Any pertinent information from the application essays will need to be brought to the attention of the college and career advisor, the counselors, and the intermediaries so they can have individual discussions with students. Students receive mentoring, youth development, and college and career exploration through our partnership with CFES. ● We have a college and career advisor who works in conjunction with the senior guidance counselor. We placed her office in the senior guidance office suite since the support of the families and assistance for counselors who encourage students to make the right choices is essential for students to get into their desired schools. Even though we are still developing the effectiveness of this office, we have seen a larger number of students seeking support with college applications and scholarship opportunities. She is working with the guidance department to create a college/career fair each semester which will expose all students, including our ninth graders, to the opportunities available to them. Also, being college and career ready means our students must become regularly exposed to more rigorous instruction and more critical feedback. It also means that teachers need to redesign their instructional plans and come to the realization that effective teaching has true impact. Teachers learn about increasing the rigor in their classrooms and redesigning their lesson plans and curricula during their common meeting time that occurs every day. ● We are trying to show all our students that college is an option for them. They are exposed to this daily as they view the courses the upperclassmen are enrolled in through the College Now Program at Lehman College. We are showing our 9 th graders that by filling out a college application, this can happen in their future. We are tracking the schools our students are applying to and are accepted to. We are trying to create a culture where our students choose which college to go to rather than the one that accepts them. We have made the most growth in getting our students college access, but we are really striving hard to get our students to college readiness. In terms of the impact of this work, we have seen that participation in our CFES mentoring opportunities is beginning to increase; student community service has also increased. We have made April college month, and we have planned 2018-19 CEP 10  college trips for all grade levels. We will continue to monitor college acceptances in order to see if students are getting accepted to the college/universities of their choice. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Currently our school has 99 (23%) students with disabilities, 48 (10%) English language learners, and 115 students in the lowest third. Our SWDs have 100% inclusion and Resource room services and our ELLs receive push in services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school made the most progress over the past year in Supportive Environment. Our school was able to increase from 73% to 78% by making our students feel safe and supported, but also make them feel challenged by the teachers and peers. Our area of focus this school year is having teachers collaborate. We will develop a plan in order to have 72% of teachers willing to try new teaching strategies. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X250 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 432 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 7 9 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 65 62 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 80.6% % Reduced Lunch 10.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 61.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.07 3% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 85% 67% 84.8% 3.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 100 83 86.0% 2.3% 23.4% 34.5% 1.9% 1.9% 2 31% 4.9 N/A N/A 84% 80% 90.0% 12% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have a rigorous curriculum for all subject areas and students have a great capacity to "build off of each other during discussions." (Quality Snapshot 2016-2017) In addition students learn a lot from the teachers feedback they provide. We currently have a strong performance based assessment in our school that allows students to demonstrate strong knowledge of content and skills. ● Based on our most recent Quality Snapshot our results for Rigorous Instruction show a drop from 92%(2015-16) to 83% ● We need to start observing student growth of the strong content and skills over the 4 years and on regents exams Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, we will increase proficiency across all grade levels as evidenced by a 3% increase in the percentage of students that score at least 50% of the total possible points on constructed responses on regents exams up to 20 % for all regents exams by having 90% of the students complete at least five regents aligned tasks in each core subject that will receive direct teacher feedback on a student friendly rubric with opportunities for revision. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Educate the staff on rigorous regents aligned tasks traits and how to effectively measure student growth over time at least once a month during Monday's professional learning meetings. Teachers Outline elements of curriculum maps that will assess student progress at least once a month during content and grade team meetings. Administrator of instruction/Teachers Professional Development Team Assistant Principal September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Check and monitor progress on a monthly basis of both teacher implementation and student progress during grade team/content team meetings and Monday's professional learning meetings at least once a month. Teachers/Students Fall Term-Spring Term Professional Development Team Measure the impact of rigorous regents aligned tasks on students progress during content and/or grade team meetings at least once a month. Teachers Fall Term- Spring Term Professional Development Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator and the School Leadership Team will work together to address these concerns at our parent teacher conferences. In particular, this group of school staff will work on how to address the parents needs to understand the rubrics utilized for regents aligned tasks at the school curriculum night in September. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Scheduling in STARS ● Staff Development to plan and assess projects ● Staff development on the effective use of technology 2018-19 CEP 14  ● Technology for Performance Tasks ● Professional Development Team meets weekly on Tuesdays ● Our professional development is completed in house. ● Funds have been allocated in Galaxy for teachers to attend professional development outside of the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Teachers will conduct a constructed response baseline for all students in September based on our school literacy focus of having students construct a claim and support it with evidence.  A data driven action plan will be created by department teams that will have a mid year assessment to track progress towards our goal.  By February 2019, students will take a mid year assessment. Teachers will collect and analyze the data provided. Teachers will adjust the data driven action plan accordingly.  By June 2019, students will have submitted at least five regents aligned tasks for evaluation on a student friendly rubric, which will be filed in their folders by teachers each semester.  By June 2019, students will have demonstrated growth towards mastering by progressing from introductory to developing, or developing to mastery on a student friendly rubric with teacher feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Regent aligned rubrics will be used to evaluate the targeted standards on the regents aligned tasks. Baseline assessments and mid year assessment task will be utilized to inform the departments data driven action plans. January/June regents exams will be used as an instrument of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. The staff takes ownership on improving their own practice and creating true partnerships with parents that result in increased student achievement. Across the vast majority of classrooms, targeted teaching strategies provide multiple entry points and high-quality supports for all learners. Student discussion and work products reflect high levels of student thinking, participation and ownership. This was reflected in our last Quality review with a rating of well developed in all areas. On the NYC School Quality Guide our school scored from 5% to 14% higher than the borough average in all areas of Supportive Environment. 2. The School has identified that we need to develop student skills that will enable students to take ownership of their own learning. We saw a 58% response rate to the question Students say that their teachers support them when they are upset on the NYC School Quality Guide for 2018. 3. Over the last four years, we have worked to create a positive tone and climate in our school. Our students wear full uniforms and we have implemented security and behavior protocols. Our students have a clearer understanding of what it means to be a part of their school community as they volunteer both within the school and the community. At this point, we are deepening our work on building the college and career readiness of our students and getting more of our students to the graduation stage on time for both high school and college. We are modifying the culture we have to fit the needs of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, in order to get students to feel supported by their teachers, grade team members will track the performance of 5-10 inquiry students, meet with them to discuss their progress on regents aligned tasks, and track their baseline and mid year assessment by increasing student response rates on the school quality guide from 58% to 60%. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams compile baseline assessment data and create inquiry teams of students. All Students September 2018 Teacher teams contact selected students and begin Inquiry process. All Students September 2018 Inquiry students revise at least one of their completed regents aligned tasks and provide feedback to teachers on their rubrics, curriculum and unit maps before mid year assessment on literacy goal. All Students September 2018-June 2019 Guidance and Department Teams Guidance and Department Teams Guidance and Department Teams All students answering at least 50 percent of constructed response questions on the regents exams correct by June 2019. All Students June 2019 Guidance and Department Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents of Inquiry students will be invited to the department inquiry meetings. Based on parent requests, the school will continue to reach out to families and inform them of the myriad of opportunities on the campus using the school app. The parent coordinator will continuously update the app and will continuously inform parents of who they can contact regarding Supportive Environment Opportunities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Grade Teams ● Department Teams ● Tuesday Meeting time ● Per session ● Supplies 2018-19 CEP 17  ● Materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February, we will assess student progress on constructed responses in regents aligned tasks by administering a mid year assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The regents exam constructed response sections. Mid year assessment will be used as the instrument of measure aligned with the regents exam constructed responses. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school has professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. On the 2017-2018, NYC School Quality guide 97% of teachers say that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels.All teachers are engaged in consistently examining teacher practice and student data within inquiry based structured professional collaborations. Distributed teacher leadership is embedded across all areas of the school. School-wide instructional coherence is seen throughout all classrooms and teachers play an integral role in key decisions that affect teaching and learning across the school, resulting in increased student achievement. 2. Based on historical 8th grade data, our students continue to struggle with literacy especially in the area of making an argument utilizing a claim and evidence. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers, in grade and content teams, will monitor, assess and modify instruction based on the use of the SGE literacy skill in order to increase student literacy skills by showing a 10% growth of literacy skills for all students on interim assessments. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers meet weekly to breakdown the literacy skills that are to be taught in each grade and content area. All Students September 2018-June 2019 Grade Teams Teachers include a literacy component to all Curriculum and Unit Maps featuring strategic and relevant literary strategies to be consistently utilized in the classroom All Students September 2018-June 2019 Grade Teams Teachers will implement strategies providing explicit step-by-step and measurable literacy skill instruction to Students with Disabilities, ENL students, as well as any other student group identified as "at-risk". All Students End of 1 st Grade Teams Term Literacy components are built into Performance tasks, which are created by content teams and graded by grade teams. All Students End of 1 st Grade Teams Term 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will expose parents to literacy strategies in the classroom using online platforms and will also be available to connect with parents and allow them to remain informed in person. This will be the highlight of our curriculum night in September. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Grade Team and Content Team meetings ● Monday PD Time ● Per session for common planning time of grade level performance tasks Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 20  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Unit based instruction will have performance tasks that include a specific literary component given at the end of each unit. By January, students will show measurable progress towards annual goal with an average score increase of 5% compared to their performance on their initial performance task. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Grade and content teams will assess performance tasks by identifying trends, measuring overall growth, and creating strategies to address targeted areas of intervention. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. School leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the entire staff and the school community. This is evident with 99% of families saying that the Principal is strongly committed to shared decision making on the 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide . Leadership and staff successfully partner with families to support student progress towards high expectations connected to college and career readiness. In addition to regularly scheduled teacher team meetings, the vast majority of teachers regularly meet in small groups and engage in inter-visitations to share best strategies to improve their practice. The school has identified specific college and career readiness skills connected to reading, writing, speaking, listening, and language and coherently embedded them across all content areas and grades 2. Teachers were surveyed in house on the effectiveness of the school’s PD plan in terms of leadership which showed that teachers wanted more professional development and more time to develop practices with technology. Over 70% of teachers surveyed indicated that they wanted more PD on school purchased tech carts and SMART boards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school leaders and administrators will develop and implement an effective professional development plan as evidenced by a 4% increase in teachers' Danielson rating in 3C from 76% to 80%. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Compile resources on differentiation; store and share using Google Docs during grade/content team meetings. Teachers Create and implement PD workshops every week during Mondays' professional development meetings. Administrator of Instruction Survey/Rate the effectiveness of these PD workshops by the end of the 1st semester. Teachers Create and Implement strategies to reach ENL's and SWD's using technology during their content/grade team meetings. Teachers Create and Implement strategies to teach Literacy in the content areas using technology. Teachers Develop benchmarks on technological impact throughout the school year. Teachers Administrator of Instruction Administrator of Instruction School Wide School Wide School Wide School Wide September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 End of 1 st Term September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school leadership team will meet monthly and create community opportunities for families by surveying parents on workshops they might be interested in throughout the school year. Families will be engaged through the surveys they will be filling out. Parents will be encouraged to participate in these workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. After school during Mondays and Tuesdays PD will be coordinated and facilitated by the school model teacher and Peer Collaborative teacher. 2018-19 CEP 23  Teachers will have the opportunity to use updated technology in the classrooms. Funds have been allocated in Galaxy for teachers to attend professional development outside of the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, the percentage of teachers receiving a rating of developing in Danielson 3c (engaging students in learning) will decrease from 36 % to 30%. By January 2019, we will decrease the percentage of teachers receiving a rating of developing in Danielson 3C by 36% to 30%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Analysis of January Advance ratings to ensure teacher engagement data increases and there is evidence of technology. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school has a culture of mutual accountability and staff takes ownership on improving their own practice and creating true partnerships with parents that result in increased student achievement. The 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide showed 93% of families say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance. Parents mentioned how teachers are always available by phone, email or text and frequently stay late into the evening to work with students. Parents have commented that they believe the school does an excellent job of helping them navigate the college application process and work closely with students from ninth grade until they graduate to ensure they are college and career ready. (QI3.4) 2. There is a need to focus on increasing parent involvement so that there will be an increase in student progress with 73% of families saying that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. (Q4a) on The NYC School Quality Guide for 2017-2018. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The school will provide 5 parental engagement opportunities which will result in a 2 % increase (from 73% to 75%) in the percentage of parents who will strongly agree with families saying that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (Q4a) on The NYC School Quality Guide for 2017-2018. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Engagement Team creates survey in which parents rank workshop topics from most to least relevant to their needs. They also are asked to suggest workshop topics that address specific needs or areas of inquiry. Parents Parents take and submit survey at Parent Teacher Night Parents School Engagement Team collects and analyzes data for trends, sets the semester schedule of Parent Workshops. Weekly meetings to reach out to parents, create and implement workshops. Organize outreach resources and utilize them: Create and maintain a parent database that includes "Tier One" parents, who have a history and/or current interest in attend Parent Workshops. SET also reaches out to "Tier Two" parents to convert them into "Tier One" parents to increase parental attendance at workshops and Parent Teacher Night. School Engagement Team School Engagement Team School Engagement Team August 2018-September 2019 PTA/Open School Conference School Engagement Team School Engagement Team Weekly SET meetings School Engagement Team Administration Administration August 2018-September 2019 August 2018-September 2019 Assess the success and areas of improvement by analyzing data from workshops and Parent Teacher Night. Enhance and create strategies for further parental involvement for the 2017-2018 school year. School Engagement Team August 2018-September 2019 Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. College for Every Student New York Cares 100 schools project 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● School Engagement Team, Parent liaison, Attendance team ● Tuesday Afternoons (after school) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By December 2018, we will compare and increase the attendance from Parent Teacher Conferences from previous year by a 1% increase at each event. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data collection from Parent Teacher Night and Parent Workshop attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Regents Scores ELA Regents Mathematics Regents ScoresMathRegents Science Social Studies Regents data and credit accumulation Regents Data and Credit Accumulation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) At Home In College For Seniors CUNY proficiency,Wilson Reading, Writing Revolution to focus on our Literacy Plan, Castle Learning for Regents Prep, Albert IO - AP Prep At Home In College For SeniorsCUNYproficiency,iReady- Web based assessment software targetingstudent needs, Writing Revolution to focus on our Literacy Plan, Castle Learning for Regents Prep, and Math enrichment Regents Prep,Writing Revolution to focus on our Literacy Plan, and Castle Learning for Regents Prep, Regents Prep,Writing Revolution to focus on our Literacy Plan, Castle Learning for Regents Prep,Albert IO - AP Prep At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 9th period skills AIS Skills Intervention Regents data One-to-one meetings with at risk students and parents Credit accumulation Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Class - SETSS When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) -During the school day Tutoring, -Ninth Period Small Class - SETSS -During the school day Tutoring, -Ninth Period Tutoring -Saturday School -Ninth Period Tutoring -Saturday School -Ninth Period -SmallGroup counseling -During the school day -One-to-one -Ninth Period 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Seven students currently qualify as STH. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We supply our STH population with Metrocards for bus and subway travel, uniforms, school supplies, clothing, and shoes as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Hiring Committee ● Curriculum Team ● Department Meetings ● Instructional Lead Teacher ● IEP Teacher in Every Grade/Department ● Teacher led workshops ● Different Workshops ex. Unit Mapping ● Teacher experience levels ● Professional Development Weekly Faculty Meetings ● Buddy teachers and Co-teachers ● Accelerated Courses 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● CCLS leaders ● Common planning time: Unit Plans – Performance Tasks and Rubrics 2018-19 CEP 31  ● Network PD for CCLS-aligned instruction ● Modifications for SPED/ELLS and use of Paraprofessionals to support students ● Specific school and/or instructional Goals and/or Objectives related to CCLS and skills ● Ongoing monitoring and support to provide teacher and paraprofessionals feedback on their practice and its alignment to the CCLS ● Lesson and unit planning that encourages CCLS best practices and strategies, monitoring the progress, and review of student work to revise the process as needed ● Purchased a new curriculum for alignment to CCLS and student achievement ● Continuous review of student work related to CCLS to modify practice and meet needs of all students ● Teacher feedback on PD and its effectiveness in the classroom – to revisit needed areas or revisions Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 CEP 32  Teachers do not participate in Title One financial allocation decisions. Teachers will develop baseline assessments in their grade teams, grade them and track students progress. Teachers will analyze trends and will develop an action plan based on the trends. Teachers' feedback on the last survey will be taken into consideration when planning and facilitating professional development. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C 5D Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 346464.00 0 11,2366.00 0 3,220,853 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 2018-19 CEP 33  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X250, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Eximius College Preparatory Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X250, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 2018-19 CEP 38  ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: 2018-19 CEP 39  ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always put forth my best effort to learn 2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 4 1 3 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: ESL/Math Saturday Academy: One math teacher team teach 1 ENL certified teacher 52 ENLS in grades 9-12 for twenty weeks. Our students need additional literacy and numeracy support, as indicated by review of NYSESLAT, as well as their ELA and Math scores. Several students come to our school with low skills in core content areas and need additional support in order to reach content area standards for grade level work. In this program, they will explore math concepts through teacher designed projects which will not only extend their math literacy, but also allow them multiple opportunities to speak, listen, read, and write in English. Instruction in the three classes will be differentiated according to the academic and linguistic needs of the participants. In order to accelerate development of academic English and increase Math achievement, teachers will utilize various scaffolding techniques and implement strategies consistent with socio-cultural leaning theory based instruction. Students will work collaboratively in accessing academic content. In the ENL/ELA class, newcomer ENLs at Entering and Emerging proficiency level will use Rosetta Stone as well as other software and internet-based resources to advance their language development. Text used in the program will include an assortment of age and grade appropriate fiction and non-fiction resources that will be used to develop academic language and increase achievement in the reading and writing modalities of the NYSESLAT and English Regents. This program will also provide support and preparation for the English and math Regents examinations. The timeline is from November 2018 to January 2019 and from February 2019 to May 2019 for 9 Saturdays from 9 AM to 11 AM (first session) 11 AM-1 PM (second session). Per session for teachers ( Mr. Borges) to teach the Saturday Math Literacy Program, whereby experiential learning activities stimulate language development . AFTER SCHOOL: ELA and Science After School Instructional Program for ELLs One ENL teacher will team teach with 1 content area teachers (English and Science) will explore literacy concepts through teacher designed projects which will extend their literacy and will allow them multiple opportunities to speak, listen, read, and write in English. Students will follow current science curriculum modified by teachers with teacher made graphic organizes to aid in learning content information. The number of ELLs in this program is 30. The ELLs in this program are in grades 9-12, the targeted subgroups are 9-10 graders at beginner, intermediate and advanced English proficiency levels. The time line is from October 2018 to June 2019, for 20 weeks, Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:35 to 3:35PM. 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information ELA/ENL(Ms. Freed, and Mr. Keriazis) and Social Studies/ENL After school program (Ms. Freed, Ms. Vargas, Mr. Costello, and Mr. Tedrow) One ENL teacher will work with 2 content area teachers (Social Studies and English). Forty ENLs in grades 9-12 (current and former ENLs) will participate in an after school program ELA and Social Studies program for ten weeks from Wednesdayand Thursday for one hour, from 2:35 to 3:35 PM, from February to June. The language of instruction for the above programs will be provided in English with the appropriate native language support. Students will follow current history curriculum with teacher made modified graphic organizers to assist in comprehension. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Principal's Principal's 3. Professional development conducted in the school that will support Title III instruction at no cost to Title III will develop language proficiency, academic language, and common core content area skills and concepts. These will be provide by our in-house PD team (Mr. Hernandez, Ms. Vargas, Mr. Boyd and Ms. Reetz) These will include: • Math/science and literacy coaches who work with teachers to plan curriculum, locate resources, and review results of instruction • Opportunities for dialogue, collaboration and curriculum planning at regularly scheduled, weekly instructional team meetings (Mondays 1/7/19, 1/14/19, 2/4/19, 2/11/19, 3/4/19) • Culminating interdisciplinary presentations of student work that are followed by a school-wide critique of both the strengths and the weaknesses of the curriculum and the resulting presentations • Monthly professional development meetings which will include the following topics: 11/13/16 - Differentiation of instruction 12/11/18 - Reading strategies 1/8/19 - language development 2/5/19 - analysis of student work, scaffolding instruction 3/12/19 - incorporating technology in the curriculum 4/2/19 - data-driven instruction. All agendas and attendance rosters will be kept by the Principal's secretary on file. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 44  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Title III funds will support the following activities for parents of our ELLs at no cost to Title III: 1. Evening Workshop Series for Parents of ENLs Two workshops series (4 sessions, 2 hours each) will be provided to groups of 40-50 parents of ENLs in Spring 2016, (February – May). The workshops will be organized by the Parent Coordinator and presented by Community Based Organizations and teachers of ENLs. Two teachers of ENLs will facilitate workshops and will also interpret/translate (Spanish, French as needed) as needed for ELL parents during the workshops. Parent workshops will be provided per evening schedule that accommodates parent and community needs. 1. One 2-hour session on becoming familiar with the English language Arts performance standards and how further development in native language can enhance second language learning 2. One 2-hour session on coaching parents in how to use math strategies in problem solving 3. One 2-hour session to explain to parents our instructional model and coach them in how to help students at home. 4. One 2-hour session on how to support students with issues of cultural adjustment and second language learning. 2. ENL class for parents of ELLs One group of 20 parents of ENLs will participate in ENL classes conducted on 10 Saturdays, 9-12 PM, February – May 2018. One ENL teacher will provide ESL instruction using Rosetta Stone software and internet based resources to ENL parents who can benefit from development of English language learning in order to better support their children in schools. This will enrich parent/family engagement in the school and provide a much needed service to students’ families. Snacks and Metrocards will be provided for the parent activities. All parents will be notified via school messenger as well as mail and backpack letters and personal call from the parent coordinator.Workshops will be provided by school staff depending on wtopics, i.e. Financial aid, college admission, computers and as needed by parents base on surveys conducted during the year.All attendance ad agendas will be kept by the parent coordinator on file. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 2018-19 CEP 45  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Eximius College Preparatory Academy Borough Bronx School Number 250 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jonathan Daly Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Robert Faison Teacher/Subject Area Emmanuel Hernandez Teacher/Subject Area Rafael Borges Related-Service Provider X. Lorenzo Superintendent M. Alcoff Assistant Principal Alcibiades Gonzalez Coach type here School Counselor Josh Javer Parent Natalia Leon Parent Coordinator Virginia Luciano Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) Sabrina Cruz C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 463 2018-19 CEP 47 Total number of ELLs 51 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.02%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 4 3 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Since all our ELLs are students receiving continuance of services, we rely on their previous exams data, e.g., NYSESLATBased on their previous performance and proficiency levels we differentiate instruction to meet the students’ literacy needs. The majority is proficient in listening and speaking, but the reverse is true in reading and writing. Hence, differentiation focuses on reading and writing skills. In addition, our school will use NYC Performance Assessment in ELA and math and social studies to assess early literacy and math skills. This data is used to better support the demonstrated needs of ELLs in the ESL and content area classrooms. A running record containing this information is kept as a portfolio and looked at every year and every month tin order to drive intructional needs of each ENL student. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 48  School wide Writing Revolution instructional strategy gives ENL students opportunities to participate in all classes by providing templates to improve their writing skills. Dynamic Discussion seating gives ENL students opportunities to listen and speak in all classrooms. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ELLs based on their outcomes in the NYSESLAT, the Regents exams, credit accumulation by grade level, promotion rate to grade levels, graduation rate and college acceptance. As an indication of the success of our program, our data reveals that our ELLs are passing their content area classes and are meeting the credit accumulation requirements for promotion to the next grade level. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? School PLC checks data and reviews progress and needs of the ENL population with our school Professional development team so that ENL instructional strategies are addressed in Monday PD sessions 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data through schoolwide baseline assessments to create instructional goals for ELLs on a grade team level. Once these goals are set, formative assessments are implemented to ensure the success of the targeted instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After looking at the EDAT data we are now able to correlate in a single tool each ENL student's attendace, and scores in each NYSESLAT Modality and other REGENTS exams as well such ELA and Math. We are also able to check wether or not a student is at risk based on these indicators. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? .ENL teacher and supervisor meet with content and inquiry teams twice weekly to share and exchange information on individual student progress. At these meetings the EDAT data is lookedd at closely to ensure 100% compliance in the implementation of each student action plan. Through the use of the EDAT we are now able to correlate in a single tool each ENL student's attendace, and scores in each NYSESLAT Modality and other exams as well. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We offer the Free Standing ENL model. Classes are ungraded with students with mixed proficiency levels and instruction includes modifaction and differentiation for various lerners and is delivered by a licensed ENL teacher. Integrated ENL instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. We use English 3D as te main curriculum. English 3D is a language development program designed to accelerate Englis profficiency. 2018-19 CEP 49  b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students receive the mandated minutes of instruction according to their level of English proficiency as per CR Part 154. Entering ENL ELLs receive 3 units of study (540 minutes of ENL instruction which include 180 minutes of Stand alone ENL, 180 Minutes of Integrated and 180 of Flex time); Intermediate ELLs receive2 units of study (180 minutes including 90 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction and 90 free stand alone ENL instruction); and Expanding students receive 2 units of study in ENL (180 minutes of instruction ENL/ELA integrated) and there is one certified ENL teacher for 51 students. The teacher provides the mintues through self-contained ESL class as well as pushing in to English classes. All Commanding students (16) are provide with integrated services and extra help during our afterschool and Saturday program.program 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instructional programs with high levels of rigor and support result in higher academic achievement for ELLs. Effective strategies used across all content areas include: differentiation, small group instruction, explicit academic vocabulary instruction, scaffolding (modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, metacognitive development, text representation). Our school focus is on reading and writing across all content areas. Studies show that native language development accelerates literacy gains in both the native language and English. As such, we offer language development and support for content instruction with native language support. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages throughout the year translated exams, quizzes, and performance tasks are translated. In addition, Regents exams are provided in their native language where appropiate. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status For SIFE students intensive academic intervention is implemented on a case by case basis, depending on the length of interupted education. Teachers aid students not only to develop a second language but also to form habbits necessary for success in an academic environment. b. For newcomers, we simplify language, amplify content, provide hands-on demonstrations, opportunities for role play, journal writing using native language or pictures. Intensive instruction prepares ELLs for ELA testing. Newcomers also are provided with after school tutorials in ELA, Social Studies, Science, and Math. c. Students who have been recieveing service for 4-6 years are typically close to testing out of ESL. For this reason, special attention needs to be focused on the specific aspects of language that are preventing students from becoming mainstreamed. With this targeted intervention students will increase the likelihood of accelerated mainstreaming. d. For long-term ELLs, it is important to examine students' academic progress on an individual basis to examine what is preventing students from achieving proficiency. Long term ELLs may need additional tutorials outside of the normal school day to recieve the extra support needed. 2018-19 CEP 50  e. Former ELLs academic progress will be closely monitored to ensure their adjustment to mainstream classroom. In extreme situations, ESL services can be provided if students struggle to adjust. In addition, former ELLs are entitled to time extensions on state exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? As previously stated, grade-level teachers strategically planned for the academic language connected with the content in order to improve ELL language development and literacy across the content areas. In addition, teachers use differentiated instruction to address students with varying learning styles. Teachers also design content objectives with multiple pathways available for students to demonstrate their knowledge of content area information. The materials that we use are predominantly teacher modified versions of readings, as well as teacher-made writing scaffolds and graphic organizers that relate to the content and grade level material. For beginner ELLs, students have access to google translate in order to translate readings a class assignments. School wide Writing Revolution instructional strategy gives ENL students opportunities to participate in all classes by providing templates to improve their writing skills. Dynamic Discussion seating gives ENL students opportunities to listen and speak in all classrooms. A school wide focus on stating a claim and providing evidence to defend is also utilize by all content area teachers of ENL. All ELLs are being supported by our ENL English 3D program (writing portfollio and Issues, reading) in the ENL classroom. Content area instruction avails them to Castle Learning and Regents Prep. Their listening and reading comprehension needs are addressed throug discussions of articles, novels, movies and documentaries. Skedula is used to track student progress. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Each special education instructor is assigned a content area. Within that department, the special education instructor works collaboratively with content teachers to achieve IEP goals in the designated environment. The ELL coordinator also works collaboratively with departments design instructional objectives that will lead to improved English proficiency for students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The school provides various intervention programs for all ENL students from Entering to Expanding. ENL receive integrated instruction in ELA and other content areas. After school program as well as Saturday programs are available to meet students academic needs. The school uses the Reading Plus Program to supplement those students now identified through EDAT with extra reading support after school. Content area teachers provide tutoring services in conjunction with the ENL teacher to all student in our ENL program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school will implement the usage of the Rosetta Stone software as wellas Reading Plus program to suplement ENL instruction. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are encouraged to participate in all after school activities and events. However for those at Risk (as identified in EDAT) the afterschool programs are mandated. Again, tutoring in different content areas is provided every Wednesday through Friday and on Saturdays. The school invites all students, including ELLs, to participate in all extra-curricular activities through flyers, information that is back-packed, phone calls, and direct intervention of ENL, physical education, and performance and visual arts teachers. ELLs participate in PSAL teams, New York Cares Program, National Honor Society and the Spanish Honor Society. 2018-19 CEP 51  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ELLs are being supported by our ENL English 3D program (writing portfollio and Issues, reading) in the ENL classroom. Content area instruction avails them to Castle Learning and Regents Prep. Their listening and reading comprehension needs are addressed throug discussions of articles, novels, movies and documentaries. Skedula is used to track student progress. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Since we provide a free standing, ENL program, which focuses on intense development of academic language and on cognates to accelerate comprehension, we are unable to compare the English performance of our ELL population to performance in their native language. However, the native language support is used as a bridge to transferring receptive and expressive 2nd language acquisition. All students are provided with a home language bilingual glossary for support in the content area classes. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required support services and resources are targeted for grades 9-12, thus they correspond to our ELLs age and grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share resources such as ENL teacher, Supplies (i.e. texbooks) Library resources and other activities for all ENL students in the building with a sister school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Every Summer newly admitted ENL students are required to participate in the school Summer bridge Program where instruction in ENL/ELA and Mathematics is provided as well as extracurricular activities selected by the student. These include dance, cheerleading, basketball, baseball, yoga classes and acting. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The school offers Spanish as an elective to increase ENL students home language Literacy. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The has developed a yearly PD plan for the entire staff. Subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselor, special education teachers, pyschologist, speech therapists, and secretaries attend professional development as provided by administrative staff which include the Common Core Standards as relate to ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 52  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Content Area teachers, Guidance Counselors, Coordinator facilitate the transition from middle to high school though the Mondays and Tuesdays meetings as well as during the school's common meeting times during the 4 th period. This year our school has focused its PD time to address ELL population best instructional practices. All faculty members are New York state certified. All agendas and attendance pages are kept at the principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Each year the school conducts a parent's night to address any issues related to its ELL population. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents including ELLs are invited to all school activities including parent nights, parent teacher workshops, college readiness workshops. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 53 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jonathan Daly, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Eximius College Prep School DBN: 09X250 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jonathan Daly Title Principal Al Gonzalez Assistant Principal Virginia Luciano Parent Coordinator Robert Faison ENL/Bilingual Teacher Natalia Leon Parent Emmanuel Hernandez Teacher/Subject Area Rafael Borges Teacher/Subject Area Josh Javer M. Alcoff Olga Glenn Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 55  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X250 School Name: Eximius College Preparatory Academy Superintendent: Michael Alcoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Luciano Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The following indicators will be used to assess our needs: Home language surveys, teacher assessment, guidance counselor interactions, and parent coordinator’s expertise in evaluating parent’s needs. Using the mentioned methods, all communication will be in both English and Spanish and will also be conveyed in oral and written forms. The findings will be disseminated to the school community via various meetings (staff, Parent association, parent coordinator, etc.) and through home mailings to ensure that all members of the community will reach out to non-English speaking parents.. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 56  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Soninke 969 348 5 7 71.99 25.85 0.37 0.52 963 352 5 7 71.55 26.15 0.37 0.52 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Aug/Sept The school will provide all written/oral communication in the parents’ native language including: letters, newsletters, report cards and various forms, i.e., trip consent forms etc. The Phone Master will be programmed to translate all communication in the native language. First Day of School Information Letter August P/T Conference Announcements All correspondence regarding school activities Sept/ Nov/ Mar/ May Sept-June Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. P.C is bilingual (Spanish) and can translate document. Any other language we use staff member who's proficient in those languages or we use the help of the LTI unit. P.C is bilingual (Spanish) and can translate document. Any other language we use staff member who's proficient in those languages or we use the help of the LTI unit. P.C is bilingual (Spanish) and can translate document. Any other language we use staff member who's proficient in those languages or we use the help of the LTI unit. Letters and updated information regarding student and school activities will be mailed out to the parents in English and native language. Phone messenger will be 2018-19 CEP 57  set up in languages other than English. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Sept through June The formal face to face meeting the school will typically have throughout the school year include parent-teacher conferences, parents workshops as well as parent teacher interactions. IEP Meetings Oct through May attendance calls and guidance counselors meetings about students social and academic progress. Sept through June interpretation service(s)? With help from our bilingual parent coordinator and some staff members, we can provide interpretation services. Also, over the phone interpretation services can be used as well. Use of bilingual trained staff members, PC, and Language line. Use of bilingual trained staff members, PC, and Language line. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, we will use the assistance of our P.C and trained staff members to contact parents/guardians. We will train staff beginning of school year to learn how to use the language line. Our school messenger and mobile application can also be utilized in the event of an emergency to contact parents/guardians. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Parent Coordinator, who is also our LAC will conduct a training on language access for all staff members. Language line information will be provided all who are present. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 58   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Multilingual welcome posters, parent guides to language access, language ID cards and etc will be posted around school and parents can get cards and brochures in PC office and in our school's main office. All correspondence will be sent and communicated bilingually. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will conduct an annual parental survey to determine the adequacy of the translation services used by the school. 2018-19 CEP 59 
