2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X251 School Name: EXPLORATIONS ACADEMY Principal: SUSANA HERNANDEZ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Explorations Academy High School 12x251 321200011251 Grades 9-12 School Number (DBN): 1619 Boston Road Bronx NY 10460 (718) 893- 6173 7188936439 Phone Number: Robert Drach Fax: RDrach@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Susana Hernandez Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kerry Eck NorcaUlloa Raul Garcia Diana Camacho Enma Alveranga Erica Morales N/A District Information Geographical District: 12 Michael Alcoff Superintendent: 2 Metrotech, 3rd Fl. Brooklyn, NY 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: MAlcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718-935-3070 Phone Number: 718-935-3071 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10460/One Fordham Plaza Bronx,NY jruiz@schools.nyc.gov (718) 828-7776/ (718) 741-8895 (718) 828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Susana Hernandez Kerry Eck NorcaUlloa N/A Diana Camacho Erica Morales Emma Alveranga N/A Jimenez Marina Raul Garcia Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) N/A Maria Alveranga Edith Soriano Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Explorations Academy is to prepare students to take on the challenging opportunities of college and career. Our students will grow to be reflective thinkers and gain the skills to become productive members of their community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Explorations Academy, instructional focus statement says, “If teachers create rigorous Regents-aligned tasks, conduct formative assessments, and provide specific actionable feedback during the lesson and on student work products, then students will develop the skills necessary to be college and career ready.” Our instructional focus will improve teaching practice and student achievement. We prepare our students for college by engaging students in critical thinking skills, analyzing documents\ texts, citing evidence, drawing conclusions, and developing a logical arguments with claims and counterclaims. Addressing literacy deficits is a continuous challenge at our school. In an attempt to create literacy capacity that promotes successful learning, we offer small group instruction, after school enrichment classes and a Saturday Regents Prep Academy. Explorations Academy has several special initiatives:  AP for all: Research shows that students who take AP courses and exams are more likely to graduate college on time. Our school offers several Advance Placement courses such as: AP English Language, AP English Literature, AP Spanish Language and AP Biology and AP Computer Science  Computer Science for all: Our students learn computational thinking, problem-solving, creativity and critical thinking. They will also learn to collaborate and build relationships with peers, communicate and create with technologies, and to better understand technologies we interact with daily. Introduces students to foundational concepts and lets them see how computing and technology impacts the world.   College Access for All: Students receive the resources and individual supports to pursue a path to college. We provide students with opportunities to visit a college campus, help them to complete the college applications, conduct family workshops on how they will afford college  Our partnerships with YMCA, ROWS Scholars to provide individualized academic planning and support from specially trained “Y” staff members. “Y” staff also provides support to Rowe Scholars to help prepare our students with the college application process and admissions exams (SAT/ACT). In addition, our students get to see first-hand what college life is like by taking college tours organized through the “Y” throughout the academic year. The tours are part of a comprehensive college-readiness program that includes weekly workshops, focused on timely topics such as high school success, time management, and college applications.  Our partnership with Lehman College where our students have the opportunity to take courses for college credits through the College Now program. To qualify for the program, our students need to pass the English Regent with 75% or higher and the Algebra Regent with 80% or higher. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Explorations Academy is a high school with 325 students from grade 9- 12 grade. The school population comprises 26% Black, 72% Hispanic, 1% White, and 1% Asian students. The student body includes 23% English Language Learners and 26% student with disabilities. Our students with disabilities specific needs includes: Integrated co-teaching instruction, individual and group counseling, transportation, one to one crisis and health paraprofessionals, small group instruction, questions read and extended testing time. Our English as a New Language specific needs includes: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Stand alone and integrated English as a new Language instruction, small group instruction, extended testing time and translations services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools for which our school made the most progress was the Strong Family-Community one. According to the Framework the key areas of focus were the following:  Rigorous Instruction- embed Common Core Shifts in mathematics and increase the rigor of the quality of student discussions;  Collaborative Teachers- expand and differentiate professional development opportunities; and develop  greater Peer Collaboration and School Commitment; Supportive Environment- create a robust plan for addressing the Social-Emotional Development needs of our students and create structures for peer support for academic work;  Effective Leadership- create opportunities for teacher participation in the plan and implementation of instructional programs and program coherence and build capacity for instructional leadership. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X251 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 351 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 5 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 7 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 91.2% % Reduced Lunch 20.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 67.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.2 4% 30% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 64% 57% 65.8% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A N/A No N/A 126 69 83.0% 1.7% 25.6% 29.9% 1.7% 0.6% 4 22% 8.5 N/A N/A 72% 64% 69.2% 3% N/A Yes No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x na na Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to Quality Review data conducted on April 2018, our school was proficient in pedagogy. Our teacher practice across classrooms reflect school beliefs that students learn best when they are provided with a learning target, criteria for success, and asked higher-order thinking questions to promote student to student discussions. In addition, the faculty. has developed structures to strengthen instructional practices by implementing scaffolds and learning strategies for all students.Teaching strategies aligned to Danielson Framework for Teaching provide multiple entry points for all learners so that they are engaged in cognitively engaging tasks. According to Framework for Great Schools data source from 2017-2018, we need to focus on rigorous instruction, specifically the quality of student discussion in the classroom. We will engage students in cognitively challenging task and higher order thinking that promote students to students’ discussion and engagement. Across the classrooms, we will improve the quality of student discussion by having students cite evidence from text to support their position during class discussions. Based on 2017-2018 advance observation reports data, our school strengths include the following: Creating an environment of respect and rapport in which the classroom interactions between the teacher and students and among students are respectful, reflecting genuine warmth, caring, and sensitivity to students. In addition, students’ behavior is 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  generally appropriate and our teachers’ response to student misbehavior is consistent, respectful and effective. However, we need to provide students with content objectives aligned to the CCLS and engage them in higher order differentiated tasks, which are real world aligned. We also must require students to read multiple texts and write citing textual evidence. Also, we need to implement formative assessments in which students make their thinking visible to inform our daily instruction. Students need to read text from multiple sources using reading comprehension strategies and write in response to a prompt. This year, as part of our Professional Learning Plan, we will work collaboratively to assess and revised Regents-aligned tasks using our school definition of Rigor. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of 11th and 12th grade students that are college ready as measure by 75% in English and 70% in Algebra Regents exams will increase by 2% or higher Student impact/ Theory of Action: If teachers create rigorous common core aligned task then students will develop the skill necessary to be college and career ready. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16 11th and 12th grade students Sept 2018 to June 2019 All teachers Part 3a – Action Plan  Teachers will engage in peer lesson studies to provide feedback to each other lesson base on the school instructional focus.  Teachers will analyze student work weekly to inform instruction.  Daily lesson task will be aligned to the Common Core Standards (CCS) by integrating reading, writing, speaking and listening to advance literacy skill.  Teachers will provide instructional support by scaffolding so students experience the complexity of the text.  Administration will identify trends and teachers instructional needs to set up professional Learning opportunities and identify best practices.  Provide individual coaching to teachers as part of their teacher’s individualized professional development plan.  Administration will set up an inter-visitation schedule for teachers to visit each other classrooms Sept 2018 to June 2019 All Teachers  Build vocabulary to access complex text and use evidence from text in discussion to improve writing.  Develop tasks instruction with multiple entry points for all learners.  Teachers of Students with Disabilities (SWD) and English as a Second Language teachers co-plan with content teachers to differentiate instruction and meet the student’s specific learning needs.  During peer to peer observations, teachers examine how they are collectively meeting the needs of SWD and ENL students in the classrooms Student with Disabilities and English as a New Language(ENL) students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  From September 2018 to June 2019 We will conduct parents workshops to support our parents understanding Common Core aligned tasks.  Every trimester parents will be invited to observe the implementation of a specific Common Core aligned task.  Conduct parent breakfasts by grade to discus student work or assessments aligned to the Common Core. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  One AP for Social Science and one AP for English and Social Studies, one lead math teacher and lead English teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17   Professional Development Common Core Standards and Danielson's Framework domains 3c . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, the average number of students scoring 75% or higher in English and 70% or higher in the Algebra will increase 1% or higher  By June 2019, the average number of students scoring 75% or higher in English and 70% or higher in the Algebra will increase 2% or higher Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  November 2018- January 2019 Assistant Principal meet with individual teachers to review units and lesson plans to ensure alignment to the Common Core Standards.  By January 2019- Administration will have conducted two observations cycles to provide actionable feedback on the lesson task and assessments.  By March 2019- Administration will have conducted four observations cycles to provide actionable feedback on the lesson task and assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. na na x na SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Last year, our four year graduation rate was 68%. After reviewing the RGCS cohort U, we have 105 students in the cohort. The seniors on track to graduate based on credits and Regents are as follows: 44 are on track , 33 are almost on track, 14 were discharged and 11 students need an alternative pathway to graduate'ss. We must improve our 4 years graduation rate of our students. According to an analysis of cohort data that includes credit accumulation and Regents pass rates, X percent of our students are on track to meet graduation requirements by June 2019. We must provide supports for students so that we will increase the graduation rate. By focusing on graduation and grade promotion by grade, we increase our collective efficacy by monitoring our student progress across from 9th through 12th grade. We can focus on strategic initiatives to ensure students stay academically engaged. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the four year graduation rate of our seniors will increase by 2% or higher as measure by credit accumulating and Regents require to graduate. Theory of Action/students: If teachers, Administrator and guidance counselors creates supportive learning environments, then students will assume responsibilities for their learning and improve their academic performance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 3a – Action Plan We will improve our graduation Rate as follows:  Beginning in November 2018, Kid talk team will review Cohort Students Sept 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselors  students on track to graduate biweekly to monitor students progress and Individual graduation plan (IGP) Small group instruction built into the students’ daily schedule twice or three times a week Seniors parents' progress monitoring meeting   Regents Saturday tutoring for 12 weeks prior to the Regents  Regents prep classes built into the students’ schedules  Provide classes online for students need who need to with insufficient credits or Regents recover additional credits during  One Academic Mentor (AM) assigned to students not on target to graduate  AM Bi- weekly "Kid Talk" meeting to monitor students progress  AM will create an individualize graduation action plan "under their wings" to create individual an action  Bi-weekly guidance and teacher meetings to track students’ progress  The “green” students on target to graduate will receive college and career counseling support  The “red” students need an alternative pathway to graduate  A student in the yellow (off-track but a potential graduate for June or August) will be assigned an Academic Mentors  A student who has attendance, lateness, or cutting challenges will check in with their AM at the beginning and end of each day.  Content teachers and Special Education teachers meet during preparation periods to scaffold instruction to meet the needs of our and ENL students.  Academic Intervention Services, SETTS, small group instruction and modification according to students’ IEP for all assessments \Regents. Sept 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselors Student with Disabilities and English as a New Language(ENL) Students of the senior cohort 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents/Guardians will be provided with monthly report on the impact of the in our Grade Level Morning Breakfast starting  Parents/Guardians will have ongoing access to Jupiter Grade and Kid-Talk team to ensure parents/guardians can communicate with teachers and school counselors on the progress of these sessions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21   Guidance Counselor will meet with parents in the beginning and middle of each trimester to discuss students' track to graduation.  Bi-weekly AM will invite parents to Kid-Talk.  AM evaluate the cohort transcripts to identified student’s not making progress towards graduation and meet with students and parent to create a graduation improvement plan.  AM review students’ attendance to Saturday Regents program and contact and inform parents of their child’s attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Two guidance counselors, will facilitate four parent meetings throughout the school year to provide parents with information about graduation and college and career readiness. These workshops will target all four grades, beginning with the 12th grade and ending with the 9th grade.  12th Grade Meeting- November 2018  11th Grade Meeting- December 2018  10th Grade Meeting- January 2019  9th Grade Meeting- March 2019  The ENL coordinator, will facilitate two parent orientation meetings for our ELL students to inform them about students' academic progress, services, and college and career readiness.  December 2019   Purchase Jupiter Grade and Kinvolved February 2019 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our progress monitoring will be as follows:  By December 2019, the seniors on target will increase from 44 to 56  By March 2019, the seniors on target will increase from 56 to 60 students  By June 2019, the seniors on target will increase from four year graduation rate of our seniors will increase by 2% or higher as measure by credit accumulating and Regents require to graduate.y March 2019, the number of seniors on target will from 56 to 67 students and by June it will increase to % or higher of our seniors will be on track to graduate by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will measure progress towards our February 2019 goal as follows:  Review the graduation tracker at the end of each trimester (Dec 1, 2018 is the end of trimester 1) to assess the progress of student from "almost on track" to "on track" to graduate. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22   Review the Individual Graduation Plan during Kid Talk to ascertain if those students who were selected made progress in their academic work.  Teacher teams will review the student assessment data to identify topics that students still haven't mastered. They will make curricular adjustments to support students' academic needs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed na na x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. na 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will engage in structured professional collaborations in teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. Teachers meet in grade-level and content specific teams to analyze data, make data-informed curriculum adjustments and plan units and lesson plans collaboratively. According Quality Review we need to expand our current assessment practices so that clear next learning steps are identified in order to make instructional adjustments to meet students’ learning needs. In an effort to improve student outcomes in the most recent NYS assessments, we need to designed curricula aligned assessment practices that inform instruction. After reviewing the June 2018 Constructed Response Analysis data, we noticed the following: In the CC algebra one Part lll 1.3% of 78 students who took the assessment earned 8 of 16 points while in Part lV 1.3% earned 8 of 16 points. In the Global Transition Thematic Essay 13. 2 % of 92 students earned 2.5 of 5 points while in the DBQ 6.5% earned 2.5 of 5 points. In the US History Thematic Essay 13.5% of 91 students, earned 2.5 of 5 points while in the DBQ 34.1% earned 2.5 of 5 points. In the CC English Argument Essay 75.5% of 53 students, earned 3 of 6 points while in the Text Analysis 67.9% earned 2 of 4 points. The data clearly indicates that our students need to improve reading comprehension and writing skills 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of student who earned at least 50% of the total possible points in the constructed response section of the Global, US, CC Algebra 1 and Living Environment will increase by 2% or higher Theory of Action: If teachers infused reading and writing literacy strategies across all content areas in their daily lesson, students reading comprehension and writing will improve and meet the demand of the constructed Regents response. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will meet using the Data wise inquiry protocol to identify specific literacy strategies for reading and writing for all four grade levels.  The Humanities and STEM departments will engage in the inquiry process to analyze student data, identify effective reading and writing strategies, and assess to ascertain if the strategies are producing the expected outcomes.  Teachers in all grade levels use the same annotation protocol for reading comprehension.  ELA teachers will engage students in the writing process. ICT and ELL teachers will utilize the literacy strategies identified by the team as part of their remediation and support where needed for SWD and ENL students.  Teachers will provide students with ongoing-feedback on  formative assessments on the use of literacy strategies. Students' progress on constructive responses will be displayed by cohort (especially for the fourth and third year cohorts) in the Principals office and Hallways for transparency and focus  Administrators will conduct formative observations to provide teachers with feedback on the implementation of the school wide literacy strategies. Teachers Oct.-2018 June 2019 Teachers Oct.-2018 June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, Coaches Teachers and Administrators Teachers Teachers Teachers Oct.-2018 June 2019 ep.-2018 June 2019 Oct.-2018 June 2019 Oct.-2018 June 2019 Teachers Oct.-2018 June 2019 Teachers and Administrators Teachers and Administrators Teachers and Administrators Teachers and Administrators Teachers and Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  From September 2018 to June 2019 our Parent coordinator, teachers and administrative team will inform parents of students' progress on formative assignments.  During Parent/Teacher conference, parents will have a chance to view their child's work based on the class curriculum.  The Parent Coordinator will inform the parents of the school wide literacy strategies that students are learning and why they are learning them. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers will be trained on the Writing Revolution  One Lead Teacher in Math and one in ELA  Lead Teaches will facilitate training for the staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Our mid-point benchmark will be as follow:  By February 2019 the Inquiry team will have participated in at least one inquiry round.  By February 2019, 70% of the staff will be part of the Inquiry team.  By February 2019, 50% or more teachers will have posted their data at least once in the classroom, the hallways and Principal’s office to establish transparency and accountability. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27   By February 2019, 100% of the teachers will have received at least one round of formative observation from administrators highlighting on improved best practice. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Teachers will develop and implemented three reading and three writing strategies that will support students   on the constructive response. Students will take four formative assessments to measure their progress toward improving on the constructive response. School leaders will conduct at least one evaluative classroom observation to gather evidence of the implementation of the literacy strategies. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). na na na x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our data shows that our students are far the below the city average with their results on the constructive responses the Regents exam. To improve our overall Regents passing rates, teachers will use assessments that are aligned to Regents to plan for rigorous instruction. The school’s common assessments determine student progress towards goals. Our teacher teams will use a system for tracking standards and/or skills gaps from assessments, we will have a systems for tracking student progress , especially relate to college readiness and graduation. We will identify literacy strategies, and observe how we provide students specific actionable specific feedback during the lesson to advance their learning. We will work on a six-week rotation cycle. Each week, we will review the lesson task, observe the implementation of the task, and review student work from the lesson. We will continue the rotation until all teachers have gone through the cycle. At the end of the three-week rotation, we will analyze assessments using our data protocol to monitor student progress and inform our daily instruction. The data will be used to inform instruction in our AIS programs. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of students who earned 65% or higher in the regents examinations will increase by 2% or higher. Theory of Action: If teachers conduct formative assessment aligned to the regents exams to inform instruction then students regents pass rate will increase. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School leaders and department teams will communicate the progress for meeting our school goals every four weeks based on assessment data. Teachers and School Leaders Oct. 2018 -June 2019 Teachers, Administrators  Department teams will present their data from unit exams, quizzes, and projects towards progress to meet our school goals, along with next steps for improvement.  Administrators meet with teachers at the end-of-marking to discuss scholarship data, intervention measures taken with students, parents outreach and student action plans  On a four week rotating bases, school leaders will provide on-going individual feedback to support the development of unit and lesson planning to ensure rigorous Regent aligned instruction. In every classroom, every 3 weeks, teachers will email the principal, Assistant Principals, and guidance counselor their student progress and display it in their classrooms.   Every three weeks teachers conduct a Regents item analysis to identify areas of focus for re-teaching.  After every assessment, students will conduct a self-assessment to inform both student and teacher on area of focus for revision of unit and lesson plans for re-teaching.  Every three weeks, teachers will analyze assessment results and design instructional programs for those students who are not succeeding to support them in their academic success.  AIS programs such as small group instruction and Saturday Regents preparation will use ongoing data analysis to identify content strands to provide focus support for planning units and lesson. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers and Students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Collaboration of parents, teachers, and administration in planning events will build capacity for strong relationships.  The school will invite parents to participate on learning walks to visit classrooms and observe instruction. Increased understanding of curriculum and school expectations will allow parents to support their child’s  progress.  Administration will conduct workshops for parents to discuss curriculum, assessment and instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher will utilize Test Wizard and Problematic to generate rigorous and analyze Regents aligned assessments. Experienced teachers will turn- key the programs during teacher professional development.  Assistant Principals will review Common Core unit and lesson alignment after the data analysis. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our mid-year benchmarks to monitor progress will be as follows  By February 2019, teachers will present assessment data 4 times to the staff indicating the progress to towards our Regents goals.  By February 2019, administrators will meet teachers at three times for unit and lesson plan feedback using the Tri-State Rubric.  By February 2019, we will have conducted at least five kid-talk meetings where teachers discuss students' academic progress and social and emotional development. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Tri-state rubric to assess rigor and common core alignment in units   2019 January Regents results. Student data generated by test, quizzes, essays and project and mock Regents Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. na na na x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Last year our overall school attendance was 82%. This year we would increase our students attendance by 2% by developing Strong Family-Community Ties. We will specifically increase student attendance through positive parental involvement in the school. We will continue promoting our positive relationships with students’ families by providing opportunities for parents to volunteer for multiple school events such as trips, health fair, college fair and other school activities. In addition, we will continue to outline how parents can have a shared responsibility to improve their child's attendance by increasing school participation, as well as, become involved in the students' daily activities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we increase the overall students attendance from 82% to 84% or higher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33 Student impact/ Theory of Action: If we develop Strong Family- Community Ties, then parents will have a shared responsibility to improve students attendance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Assigned one Attendance Angel for groups of student with chronic absentee  Parents will chaperoned school trips and volunteer for our fund raising events.  Parents identify ways they could contribute and support with school attendance goal  Monthly text messages will be send to the families of attendance progress  YMCA ROWES will conduct workshops to educate parents and how parents can get involve in school events to increase students attendance  Our attendance team will be tracking systems in place that revisited weekly by our team.  Attendance teams meet weekly to review open 407, chronic absentee data, parental outreach and attendance incentives.  90% attendance percentage by grade displayed monthly  Provide monthly incentives for students with 90%  attendance or higher Identify students with low attendance and develop a plan to improve attendance Oct. 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, Assistant Principal, and Principal Students with chronic absentee and poor attendance attendance  Parent association will volunteer to conduct attendance outreach Invite parents to celebrate students with 90% attendance  Parents and Students Oct. 2018 to Jun 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  On a monthly basis invite parents will be invited to attend our attendance meeting.  Invite parents to monthly breakfast to discuss their child’s attendance progress Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Per session for Guidance and teachers to conduct workshops after school.  Parental involvement trips and events and Purchasing of Jupiter Grade  Monthly Parent Newsletter and Purchasing of Phone Messenger. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Parent Coordinator will have sign in sheets monitoring the number of parents that volunteer for different school events.  Parent Coordinator will develop a survey where parents can identify different opportunities that they participated in the school  By January 2019 the overall school attendance will increase from 82% to 83%  By June 2019 the overall school attendance will increase from 83% to 84% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Parent participation in open school night.  Parents participating in the parent survey.  Parents participating in observing their child's classrooms  Parents volunteering participate in school trips  Parent participating in all school workshops Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who have scored below passing on the Regents exam receive additional small group instruction/Regents class. ENL Student and SWD students receive support through Achieve 3000. Students receive digital support through Collections. For Algebra 1 and Geometry we providesmall group instruction and digital support using Think Through Math two or three days a week. In a addition, Regents prep classes for 10 th 11th and 12 th graders who have scored below passing in the Algebra Regents. After school or Saturday academy prior to the Regents exams. Achieve 3000 Tutoring/Regents support for students who have scored Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Repeated reading and writing Small group, and Extended Day During school and after school Repeating content and numeracy Small group, and Extended Day During school and After school Repeated content reading and writing Small group, and Extended Day During school and After school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) below passing on the LivingEnvironment Regent Exams. Achieve 3000 Tutoring/Regents Support. Students who have scored below passing on any Social Studies exams. One counselor for 11 th and 12 th grade and Special Education students. A second counselor for 9th and 10 th grade and ENL students. Repeated content, reading and writing Small group, and Extended Day During school and After school Individual, family and group counseling During school Individual planning, individual crisis intervention and counseling services. Effective referrals and follow-up processes. Provide early awareness and exposure to colleges and careers. Collaborates with teachers to ensure students’ academic success. Create and implement workshops for parents and teachers Preventive group activities to meet students Social Emotional needs 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 36 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Every students will get a Explorations Academy book bag and supplies, student will be provided the opportunity to for academic support in after school and Saturday academy, guidance will provide support by identifying outside agencies for social and medical support, parent workshops by guidance, teachers and parent coordinator. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are not a Non-Title I school 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  We are not a Non-Title I school 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are not a Non-Title I school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We recruit only highly qualified teachers. All of our teachers are certified in their content area. We hire our teachers, based on our students’ needs, using multiple tools such as ATR pool and teacher finder candidates. In order to attract, recruit and employ highly qualified teachers a hiring committee review applicants’ resume. We recruit at various educational institutions through ongoing communication with NYCDOE Office of Recruitment, Teacher Collaborative, Fellows and referrals from our staff. In addition, we receive referrals from our school partner Lehman College and other higher learning institutions. We look for teachers that have a strong background in technology or that are willing to get training from our Tech Team. All our candidates must conduct a demo lesson in the subject that they will be teaching. Our hiring committee composed of administrator, students and teachers of the subject meet to discuss the candidates’ lesson in three categories: Content, Management and Engagement. Parents, students, content area teachers and parent coordinator are involve in the teacher selection process. Once a decision has been made we invite the candidate to a group interview to determine if the candidate will be a match for our school. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our new hires receive one- to- one mentoring from one Instructional Lead Teacher, coaching content experts and professional development support in and out of school. Some of our professional development include: Content, professional development from , workshop from Teacher Effectiveness Program (TEP), National Council of Teachers of Mathematics conference and National Science Association Conference and Administrators. Coaches assist administration in designing and providing professional development. Data gathered from HSST and Advance is used to inform what PD should be offered based on teacher observation ratings and teacher self-reflections. Finally, our Teachers College and Advance Talent coaches provide several professional development sessions around the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards and the Danielson Teaching Framework. Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not a TA school 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not a TA school Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not an elementary school 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our Teachers are involved in the use and selection of multiple assessment such as measure of Student Learning (MOSL) unit test, midterm, final, mock Regents, periodic assessments, argumentative essays and reports. The decision making process that our teachers participate regarding the use of and selec5tion of multiple assessments include the following: weekly instructional team meeting, bi-weekly department meeting, individual coaching sessions and weekly grade team meetings. At the end of every school year, our teachers analyze our Regents data, giving us trends to be used for planning for the next school year. The instructional team, MOSL Committee and each department team use this data to determine the best forms of assessment. Once the assessments are chosen, they are analyzed on weekly and by-weekly basis. Through use of instructional, department and grade teams, we decide what instructional changes need to made at the unit and planning level. The Instructional Team looks at the overall trends in the school assessment data. Our department teams look at trends for their specific content based on a cycle of formative and summative assessment. The grade teams look at student work to assess the gap in student learning. On a weekly and biweekly, basis we provide professional development regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our instructional and department teams use the Looking at Data protocol. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 301,342.00 na na 0 11,200.00 0 2,503,046.00 x na na na x na x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 13,16, 22 na na na 13,16, 22 na 13,16, 22 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44   Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Explorations Academy High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Explorations Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template [Explorations Academy High School], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act. Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Based on the English, Science and Social Studies NYS Regents examination our ENL students scored below 65%. The score indicated that our ENL students need to improve in their essay writing skills and reading comprehension. The assessments show that improvements in essay writing and open-ended responses were needed in order for students be better prepared in the content area aligned with the Common Core State Standards. Therefore 58 ENL students in 9-12 grade will receive additional instruction during Saturday and after-school programs. These programs focus on content and skills specific essay writing for English and Social Studies. We will also focus on improving students reading comprehension through content specific reading strategies for open ended questions. In addition, we will develop our ENL students writing skills to improve their writing and English language skills. The ENL class will follow a Balanced Literacy approach with scaffolding instruction. Students will engage in activities developing their listening, reading, writing, and speaking skills. Students will participate in a rigorous academic program to increase their English language proficiency levels, academic language, and higher-order thinking skills. We have have two ENL teachers push-in in the content areas ( English, Living Environment, and Global History) during the school day. The after-school program will begin on December 3, 2018 and will end June 7, 2019. The program will meet two days a week after school as follows: One ENL teacher will provide support for English and History- Monday and Wednesday. The other ENL teacher will provide support for Science & English on Tuesday and Thursday from om 2:50pm to 4:30pm for 18 weeks. The two ENL teachers are currently team teaching in these content areas. The Saturday program will be from December 8, 2018 through January 19, 2019 and April 20, 2019 through June 15, 2019 from 9:00am to 12:00pm. These session will meet for a total of thirteen sessions. The school complement the cost of the program with other funding sources.The instructional materials will include achieve 3000, The key to understanding Global History- Jarrett Publishing Company, Living Environment- Glencoe Science, Collections- Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. The language of instruction will be English and or Spanish for Global and English for Science and English. Achieve 3,000 will be in English and Spanish. All students will be taught by two NYS certified ENL teachers. Students will be grouped according to the identified areas of needs based on previous Regents or Mock Regents examination. Teachers will maintain a folder for al students with the work completed. Teachers maintain a separate folder with attendance and lesson for each class. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All teachers working in the Title lll program will receive ongoing PD from our Assistant Principal, who is a NYS certified as an ENL teacher and is currently supervising our ENL program. There will be a series o five one hour sessions during the school year from Nov 2018 to May 2019. The schedule will be as follows:September 2018- Differentiating Instruction for ELLsNov 2018- Teaching in a Cultural Rich EnvironmentDecember 2018- Writing Strategies for ELLs across all content areasFebruary 2019- Content Reading Strategies for ELLs across all content areasMarch 2019- Differentiated Tasks and AssessmentsThese series of Professional Development will positively impact the progress of ENLs because teachers will implement these strategies in their daily lessons. Through these strategies students will further develop their reading and writing skills which will result in an increase in student achievement within the content area, as well as higher Regent passing rate. Teacher(s) and Assistant Principal providing PD will also receive ongoing PD, provided by the Bronx Borough field Support Center on topics relevant to Tttle lll or co-teaching models, such as effective ENL strategies for the content area. Attendance records, as well as, all handouts and instructional materials will be kept in the main office labeled "Professional Development." In an effort to improve content area instruction for all ENL, our trained Tittle lll ENL teachers will turn-key the professional development that they attended to all content teachers. The ENL teachers will guide content teachers through the process of learning content literacy strategies and ENL methodologies, so that they can infuse them in their daily instruction. In addition, peer conferencing by ENL teachers with content teachers to discuss modifications needed for ELL in the content area. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Explorations Academy will have two workshop sessions for the parents of our ENL students. Additional support will be made available for the parents of the ENL to attend from December to January for a total of 3 hours. The workshops will be presented in the parents' home languages whenever possible with the use of translators. The parents will be notified of these activities via phone calls and letters. The workshops will be provided by the bilingual school counselor (Mr. R. Garcia) and the ENL teacher (Ms. Nin) both are fluent in Spanish. During the scheduled workshop sessions, parents will be informed of how to support their child's education 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities and their higher-education ambitions for the future. The Guidance Counselor and ENL Teacher will provide these workshops to the parents of the targeted ENL population for one and a half hours for the duration of two sessions. Workshop #1: Many parents of our ENL students have not attended college in the United States. The more we can educate them about the process of helping their children choose and apply to appropriate colleges, the more our ENL students will actually end up in college. We will ask parents how their experiences of the two workshops differed, and how they have influenced their hopes for their children. With these workshops, we hope to increase collaboration and communication to improve parental involvement within our ENL population. Workshop #2 - We have found that assisting parents in understanding high standards for academic achievement and assessments, as well as how to monitor their children‘s progress, produce better graduation rates. The sharing and communicating of best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all school-based personnel can help parents and students continue a productive path towards high school graduation.Records will be maintained including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents’ preferred languages in the main office labeled "Parent Engagement Activities." Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional Development Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Explorations Academy High School Borough Bronx School Number 251 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Susana Hernandez Coach Laura Payanno-Ortiz ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Yennys Nin, Vito Francois Teacher/Subject Area Marina Jimenez Teacher/Subject Area Eric Strebel Related-Service Provider Milagros Rodriguez/Sp E. Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Robert Drach Coach Nathan Dilworth - Math School Counselor Raul Garcia Parent Yolanda Garcia Parent Coordinator None Field Support Center Staff Member Pierre Wladimir Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 345 Total number of ELLs 83 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 24.06% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Qualitative and quantitative Data: During 20017- 2019 our school will use ELL Data Analysis tool. This is a report generated in Intranet containing qualitative and quantitative data of students performance in the NYSESLAT, NYSISTELL, Spanish lab, home language and regents scores. This report will be created by the ENL Coordinator and the ENL teachers and it will be distributed to teachers and administrators. Qualitative data will be collected through daily assessments (Formative assessment) This data will be used to modify day to day instruction for ELL students. We are currently using Collections Curriculum, and the data mentioned above is used to guide 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  and differentiate instruction in ELA. In Social studies we use New Visions Curriculum. New vision is also scaffold and tailored to our ELL needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Students are administered formative assessments periodically to determine their proficiency level, language needs as well as content mastery. ENL Teacher meet with their co teachers and design lessons their lesson during common planning time. Teachers both the content teacher and ENL teacher sit together to create learning targets and language targets. Content teacher selects the content students ought to learn. The ENL teacher creates the language targets, necessary scaffolds for ELL students based on Language Progressions. Together the ENL Teacher and the Content teacher think about the most useful pedagogical strategy for that particular lesson, whether it is a jigsaw, inside outside circle, or a Socratic seminar. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate success of our ELL program regularly through student progress reports and periodic assessments . In addition, we identify and monitor academically at-risk students each marking period through our ELL team. Students are identified as being at-risk based on classes failed, credit accumulation, attendance, and Regents accumulation. Interventions are implemented based on needs. As we evaluate the success of our programs in an ongoing way, we also make changes to stand alone and integrated ENL schedules, schedules and programs, and after-school or Saturday programs. We will also be using ELL Data Analysis Tool to informed and modify lessons. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We offer small groups, after school , Saturday Academy to support students needs. In addition we have Kidtalk once a week, were teachers meet students at academic risk and create a personalized intervention plan for the students. Students and teachers will meet periodically to follow up , and discuss progress towards the intervention plan. The title three money will be used to buy a Achieve 300 is used to support our students English writing and reading skills as these two areas have been identified as areas of development for our ELL students. Furthermore, we will offer Saturday academy to further support ELL students who had being identify at risk of falling behind in their classes or at risk of becoming long term ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use data from the NYSESLAT, Regents scores, periodic formative and summative assessment data to create data driven instruction to address the language and academic needs of our students. The ENL Coordinator monitors ATS and generates RLAT reports every two weeks. ENL teacher communicate with content teachers about students progress in a regular basis. Data from Jupiter grates is also used to identify students at risk of falling behind. Saturday academy will be offer as an academic intervention tool. Our teachers are are informed of students proficiency levels. They receive modify RLAT reports at the beginning of the year. They use this reports to differentiate instructions based on students' present proficiency level. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We monitor atudents perfomance using ELL Data Analysis in intranet. We create an analysis report utilizing data from ATS such as the regents scores (reds report ) and NYSESLAT ( RLAT report) There is a gradual growth in terms of proficiency from 9th grade to 11th grade. In 9th and 10th grade, most ELL students are in the Transitioning and Expanding levels. This number reduces in the 11th grade, and reduces even further in 12th grade so that most students are reaching the Commanding level. Additionally, our data reflects our intake from year-to-year. Cohorts with a higher number of newcomers demonstrate higher numbers of Entering and Emerging levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Our ENL Specialist, Ms. Nin, carefully analyzes the data to ensure students are receiving the mandated number of service hours. This data is shared with those staff members who work with ELLs so they can use this data to inform instruction and design units and lessons that meet the students' learning needs and provide them multiple entry points to access the content. We will refer to EDUR, our Monthly updated report to ensure that all ELL are receiving the mandated hours of service, Integrated ENL and ENL Stand Alone. Reviewing this report will ensure our ELL are programmed on STARS. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. How is instruction delivered? a. What are the organizational models (e.g., Departmentalized, Push-In [Co-Teaching], Pull-Out, Collaborative, Self-Contained)? At Explorations Academy, we have several organizational models to deliver instruction. First, instruction is delivered to all students in freestanding ENL classes. Next, students with specific instructional needs receive additional Academic Intervention Skills English classes. These students also receive instruction online literacy program (Achieve 3000) which differentiates and adjusts to students reading level and have an auditory visual component to address the need of our ELL. In addition, integrated/ Push-in instruction is provided in content area classes. Finally, teachers meet in both grade team meetings and content area meetings to work collaboratively to design instructional delivery. In addition, class of students travel as a group to ensure supports are given systematic manner. At Explorations, all students are placed into their classes by grade based on students' level of English and passing scores on Regents and other assessments. Classes are created based on grade level; that is, 9th grade students are placed in 9th grade classes. In the 10th and 11th grade, students continue in grade-level classrooms with the exception of a few students who travel to other classes only during certain periods of the day based on academic needs and performance. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ESL Guidance Counselor, Mr. Garcia and our ESL teacher meet to identify the ESL students and their levels. Students are scheduled in ESL classes according to their level: entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, or Commanding. We ensure students receive the mandated number of instructional minutes by scheduling 9-58minutes periods of stand alone and integrated ENL for entering ELLs, 6-58 minutes periods of stand-alone and integrated ENL for emerging, 3-58 minute periods of push-in ENL instruction for Transitioning and expanding, and 2-58 minute periods for commanding ELLs. a. Students are scheduled in the allocated time for ESL, ELA and NLA classes with licensed teachers in all areas. ELL are programmed on STARS 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  accordingly to their mandated hours of standalone ENL and integrated ENL. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In science classes, instruction is delivered according to the English proficiency level of each classroom in English or Spanish. Approximately one of four grade-level classrooms is categorized as Freestanding ENL and thus receives instruction in English with support in Spanish. In addition, our teachers employed inquiry-based instructional approaches such from Think-Pair-Shares, Group work Collaborative, differentiated instruction, Bloom's Taxonomy, Technology-rich lessons, and Assessing for learning strategies. History instruction is delivered in English and Native language. Students receive translations and interpretations when appropriate, with differentiation and tiered instruction according to the English proficiency of the students in the 9th grade. A certified ESL teacher collaborates with a content area teacher. In 10th grade and 11th grade delivery of instruction is in English. To facilitate understanding and comprehension, we use scaffolding; Assessing for Learning, and project based learning. Literacy strategies are infused within the content instruction. Students receive instruction as a whole group, in small groups, and independently. In order to make content comprehensible, students are exposed to a variety of materials via technology. In English, instruction is delivered in either English for students with differentiation and push-in for ELL-SWD according to the English proficiency of the students. A certified ESL teacher collaborates within the class with a content area teacher. teacher In addition, a Literacy Skills class to support students. ENL and NLA support concepts and skills embedded in ELA New York State Standards and performance indicators. In mathematics, instruction is delivered according to the English proficiency. In 12th grade, our classrooms has a bilingual paraprofessional to support the beginner and intermediate students. Students are offered peer tutoring and additional tutoring with an educator for math. Although students are grouped according to their proficiency in language or numerous or score in the Standardize Regents exams depending on grade level, the range of students' proficiency in mathematics is broader than other subject areas. This leads to differentiated instruction in each classroom and push-in sessions to meet the needs of all students in all programs. In addition ELL-SWD receive instruction from a licensed Sped Teacher in a contend class. Sped teachers and ENL teacher co plan together in Google drive to make sure ELL-SWD are receiving the appropriate modifications as specified in their IEP's. ELL and ELL SWD received a unmodified versions of grade level material modified by the ENL teacher, Sped Teacher. For instance in ELA SWD will received a modified version of collections. In social studies students will received a modified handout with a modified version of the text. Other supplementary scaffolds such as visuals and manipulative are integrated in the lesson to support all learners in the classroom. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All our ELLs are evaluated in their native language whenever possible. Students received native language support during assessment such as bilingual glossaries, Bilingual dictionaries, and electronic translators. Teachers used electronic translators to translate students work to evaluate students work. In addition whenever possible teachers or paraprofessional that speak the same language as the students will assist teachers evaluating students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Describe your instructional plan for SIFE. Students who are recognized as SIFE receive additional focused instruction. The ESL teachers and Paraprofessional provide push-in with these students and after school tutoring. Teachers also meet in content inquiry teams and grade teams to look at student work and discuss these students' needs, strengths, weaknesses, and progress and determine effective teaching strategies. Students are arranged in both heterogeneous groups according to English proficiency. In Science, SIFE studentsare promptly given diagnostic content tests to gauge target areas. After-school and Saturday tutoring services are then provided to strengthen weak content-area knowledge. In Math, SIFE are placed in the same learning environment according to their needs in math. After-school tutoring for the target population will include SIFE students that need intense intervention to advance them to the current level of instruction. When the Push-In method is used in mathematics classrooms, one of the teachers will provide extra support for SIFE students during the lesson. b. Describe your plan for ELLs in US schools less than three years (newcomers). Additionally, because NCLB now requires ELA testing for ELLs after one year, specify your instructional plan for these ELLs. In the 9th grade, our school use diagnostics to place students in appropriate (ESL Classes) according to their English proficiency. Students receive the required number of minutes in ESL, along with Native Language classes. In the 10th and 11th grade, students are prepared for the ELA Regents with the expectation that they will pass and have the opportunity to enroll in AP Language classes in 11th and 12th grade. In the 11th grade, students prepare for the SAT, and students who have not passed the ELA Regents take additional English classes. Students who qualify will take AP English and Spanish classes. Students who are still designated Beginners receive double period blocks of ESL in addition to Push-in instruction in ESL. students receive after school tutoring and Saturday academy for additional support in preparation for ELA Regents. In math, 9th grade students are taught in English with native language support. As students progress, native language supports are gradually withdrawn to accommodate students' growing English proficiency levels. By 11th grade, students are expected to learn at the Regent’s level, in English. Additional support materials consist of lessons in the native language as well as online materials. Teachers provide continuous periodic assessment (diagnostic, formative, summative, and predictive exams) to help focus and gauge the effectiveness of content, language, and critical thinking skills acquisition. c. Describe your plan for developing ELLs: Developing students receive ELL services and are placed in classes to meet their needs. They receive a period of literacy and core content classes in a differentiated instruction model. Many of these students are also part of the inquiry team, where teachers focus on their specific learning needs and create intervention strategies. In addition, tutoring is provided based on individual needs of the students. The students are monitored to check the progress they are making and to address their learning needs. All students are expected to complete the requirements for graduation within the four years. d . Describe your plan for Long-Term ELLs: For our long-term ELLs, we have continued to differentiate according to the students' specific literacy needs and strengths. Tutoring is also provided based on the needs of the students. e. Former Ells: Fomer ELLs, have continued differentiation and accomodations according to the students' specific literacy needs and strengths. While some long-term ELLs have received extra skills classes others continue with mainstream ELA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  classes. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our teachers work collaboratively in grade team meetings and content teams to come deepening material for ELLs. This practice will be expanded to include the new common core standard through project based and technology. Our school follow a Balanced Literacy approach with scaffolding instruction. Students are engage in activities developing their listening, reading, writing, and speaking skills. A curriculum infusing Common Cores Standars units are developed. All teachers will develop learning targets and criteria for learning to assess all students. The learning targets are created using Bloom's to increase English language proficiency levels, academic language, and higher-order thinking skills. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? For our ELL-SWD students, we have a special needs teacher who supports and enriches students' learning based on their individual IEP. We have one Special Ed teacher per grade; the teachers are experts in the content area that they are pushing. All Special Ed teachers push-in and pull- out to support our IEP student’s instructional needs. The Special Education teachers meet with the content teacher for the grade on a weekly basis to discuss instructional strategies such as differentiated scaffolds in order to accommodate all types of learning modalities. In addition, the ESL teacher and the Special Ed teacher meet to discuss strategies and next steps. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, social studies and science include regularly scheduled additional skills classes, Saturday and after school program for students scoring low on Regents and/or in-house periodic (DYO) assessments. In general, these skills classes are differentiated according to the student level and have audio and visual strategies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to integrate technology courses to provide PBL (Project Based Learning) . In addition, the school will help ELLs by incorporating on-line , credit recovery classes. and AP Language courses. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services will be discontinued for ELLs since they have shown improvements in all academic areas. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. There is little to no conflict between these subgroups and other students in our school. All students in good standing are allowed to participate in after school athletic programs such as our Basketball and Baseball, Soccer and Drama clubs. All our ELL students are also eligible for our enrichment program sponsored through Title III. This program, which meets after school and Saturdays throughout the year, allows students to experience several levels of hands-on academic learning and engagement via various field trips. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Technology is provided in every classroom to support the instruction for ELLs. In particular, each classroom is fitted with a smart board, 4 computers with Internet access and a printer in all the classrooms to enhance auditory and visual learning. Classroom libraries, are present in each classroom. If appropriate learning materials are available, all teachers have access to two copy machines and an ample supply of copy paper to support instruction. The scjhool will continue to provide ample chart paper, bulletin board paper, and additional supplies to teachers to ensure a print-rich environment for all ELL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language Arts (Spanish) is offered by certified instructors for at least 58 minutes daily to all ENL students. Many students in freestanding ESL programs are offered courses in Regent Prep and AP Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and support at Explorations for ELLs corresponds with their ages and grade levels (9th through 12th grade). Social services, guidance, and parental support also correspond directly with student ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Technology is provided in every classroom to support the instruction for ELLs. In particular, each classroom is fitted with a smartboard, 4 computers with Internet access and a printer in all the classrooms to enhance auditory and visual learning. Classroom libraries, are present in each classroom. If appropriate learning materials are available, all teachers have access to two copy machines and an ample supply of copy paper to support instruction. The school will continue to provide ample chart paper, bulletin board paper, and additional supplies to teachers to ensure a print-rich environment for all ELL students. Our ELL students are fully integrated to our school culture to ensure their sociolinguistic and emotional needs are met. We have available the gym the library to all our students. We celebrate our college week every month we our ELL are informed of college related matters. We plan educational trips to exposed ELL students the new immigrant experience. We visit the National Constitution Center at Philadelphia, and other important land mark in New York City and Washington DC. This is a part of a project based and this trips culminate ELL learning experience. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). A one-day orientation for new ELLs is conducted over the Summer. One-day orientations are also offered for students and parents. During these orientations, students and parents are given instruction in various aspects of the school, including student uniforms (dress code), overall academic comportment, and the school's expectations with regard to academic progress. These skills are further developed with a series of workshops for parents offered by the ESL teacher and guidance office. Once students arrive in September, the 9th grade cohort, in particular, conducts a series of grade-level meetings to further help the students understand the overall expectations and daily routines of the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All ELLs at Explorations Academy are given opportunities to take lessons in NLA (Spanish), ESL, and ELA. They complete a language assessment for placement in Spanish Honors or AP Spanish. By strengthening their native language skills we also improve their English Language acquisition skills. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL teachers receive on going professional development. New teachers attend in-house professional development usually focusing on Differentiated Instruction and Assessing for Learning Strategies. Throughout the year all teachers are offered support through coaches, team leaders and/or administrators trained in ELL methodologies. All teachers receive several formal and informal observations each year from administration. When these observations occur, administration uses a "walk through" tool created to address the special needs of ELLs in our classrooms. By checking through the various categories listed on this tool, teachers and administration alike can look at the various aspects of pedagogy for ELLs, determine needs, and address those needs through future lesson clinics and observations. Teachers and other staff members attended outside professional development. All Secretaries, Parent Coordinators and Paraprofessional are invited to all professional opportunities held within the school. Paraprofessionals discuss the days lesson with the ICT teachers, but also with ELL support teacher and content teacher to support our ELL's and SWD ELL's. Our comprehensive PD plan include and are embedded in our daily circular six. Our ESL teacher meets weekly with the English department to look at student work and assessment. In these meetings we have an ELA coach that meets one on one with the teachers. In addition, twice a month a coach from Columbia University Teachers College works with our teachers on Common Core Curriculum alignment- Our Bronx Field Support Center also provides Professional Development in CCSS development and the Danielson Framework. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers meet periodically with coaches, team leaders, and administrators and meet through interdisciplinary Common Planning Time. All teachers meet several times a week in Common Planning Time and Content Team Meetings. During these meetings, teachers are given opportunities to brainstorm and work together on various issues regarding the ELLs in their classrooms. Together they create and monitor strategies for improvement. During peer to peer observations, teachers examine the way they are collectively meeting the needs of ELLs in their classrooms. Teachers often use the same walk-through tool that administration uses, but it may be modified by content teams to focus on a particular area of instruction. They observe and evaluate scaffolding techniques and other forms of differentiated instruction. After the mutual observations they confer to find ways to further enhance their instruction. Finally, to support our new initiatives in technology, several teachers have begun to attend professional development sessions in the area of instructional technology. Agendas and attendance sign in sheets are filed in the main office by the community assistant, Ms. Perez. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents will be informed by mail, telephone calls or home visits about mandatory meetings with the ENL teacher, content teacher and bilingual guidance counselor to set goals for academic improvement and behavior modifications at least twice per school year. All communication with parents is logged. Our teachers also meet with parents on a trimester basis to revisit goals and make changes based on student progress. We provide parents Translation and Interpretation service either through staff or over the phone translation services and all handouts are presented in their home language 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parents are initially introduced to the school prior to the commencement of their child's first year. Parents and students attend orientation sessions which outline the expectations of the school, as well as programs offered. Monthly Parent Association meetings are conducted by our Parent Coordinator. Parents are represented on teams such as the School Leadership Team, Parent Teacher Conference and in the Comprehensive Educational Plan. Parents who take a leadership role are sometimes invited to and attend staff retreats. Parents are informed of their progress every three weeks. Finally, parents are frequently invited to the school to meet with teachers and counselors to set goals for academic improvement and behavior modification. Explorations Academy will have two ELL International show case nights only for our ELL students and their parents. Our ESL certified teacher will have the ELL student’s present an oral project presentation to their parents and families. By doing this, parents will have an opportunity to observe the progress ELL students are making in language skills acquisition and will have the opportunity. By doing this we hope to increase collaboration and communication to improve parental involvement within our ELL population. In addition, our ELL students are invited to attend our annual parent-student weekend retreat to strengthen parent child relationship. Translation support is provided to the parents. Correspondence including school communication and other related documents are send to parents in their prefer language as indicated in the Home Language Report. Also for interpretation services our school uses the DOE over the phone interpretation services. Also a great number of staff members speak Spanish and French, and they communicated with parents in their prefer language. Records of events including Parents nights, ELL orientations are kept in agendas (signing sheets ). This will be place in a binder or a Google Drive. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Susana Hernandez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Explorations Academy HS School DBN: 12x251 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Susana Hernandez Title Principal Robert Drach Assistant Principal Yadirha Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Yennys NinVito Francois ENL/Bilingual Teacher Yolanda Parent Marina Jimenez Teacher/Subject Area Miagros Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Raul Garcia School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 6/22/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 6/22/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X251 School Name: Exporations Academy HS Superintendent: Ela The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yennys Nin ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In the school emergency contact cards, parents identified the language in which they want to receive school information. Then, this information is updated into ATS. The school uses the school's automated messaging service to deliver information to parents. Non-English speaking parents receive messages in their preferred language. Also, written information is sent to parents in their preferred language. The school has staff members available as needed for the number of parents who need oral interpretation as well as written translation. In case the school does not have the native languages required, the school contacts the DOE Translation and Interpretation Services unit to request an interpreter. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Parents' peferred languages are: Spanish, Bengali and French. Spanish, Bengali, French 239 231 2 4 .67% 44.17% .38 .76 239 234 2 4 .67% 44.83 .38 .77 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 0 Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families September and October Explorations Academy High School disperses the following documents to parents in their home language every year: After school announcements, Freshmen Orientation letters, parent newsletters, parent-teacher conferences announcements, NYS Regents exam dates letter, upcoming events and school policy rules and regulations letters. Meeting Announcements September through June Monthly Calendar September through June How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Utilizing bilingual proficient staff in students’ primary language. Using the NYCDOE translation services. Hire translators when necessary in order to communicate with parents. Use translations programs provided by the DOE and third parties as needed based on the parents’ demands. Utilize bilingual proficient staff members to translate meeting announcements. Utilize bilingual proficient staff members to translate the calendar before it is mailed home. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Newsletters September through June Utilize bilingual proficient staff members to translate the newsletters before they are mailed home. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide September and October interpretation service(s)? NYCDOE Interpretation services phone line. In addition we utilized bilingual staff member to orally communicate with parents. Our school provides formal meetings and informal interactions with parents throughout the year as follows: Weekly informal meetings are provided to parents by the guidance team and Attendance Teacher. Twice a year parents are invited to attend parent-teacher conferences. The IEP team schedules monthly meetings with our Students with Disabilities (SWDs), as needed. In addition, twice a year, parents of English as a new Language (ENL) students meet during awards ceremony for all ENL students. Grade teachers have weekly meetings with at-risk students, where the parent is invited to discuss strategies and techniques that can assist their child improve academically and socially throughout the year. PTA September to June Parent Workshops September to June Disciplinary Meetings Ongoing Both the principal and the guidance counselor facilitate the meeting in English and Spanish. They are both native speakers of Spanish. The guidance counselor facilitates the parent workshops in English and Spanish. He is a native speaker of spanish. We use the DOE interpretation service hot line. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  In case of an emergency, parents will be contacted in their home language utilizing the doe services interpretation over the phone. Utilized bilingual staff to communicate with parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our ENL specialist and our Assistant Principal facilitate and turnkey professional development to our staff throughout the year as indicated in our year long professional development plan. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Bill of Parent Rights is provided to parents at registration and by the ESL, foreign language and attendance teachers. The parents' Bill of Rights and Welcome Poster are posted by the main entrance of the school. The availability of translation services is posted in the guidance department as well as in the main entrance of the school. In addition, the safety plan includes procedures that ensure that all parents have access to administrative communication regardless of language barrier. The school uses the DOE translation services to provide letters and other written information to parents so that correspondence is understood by all parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school gathers feedback on the quality and availability of services during parent teacher conferences and through a parent survey mailed to parents which provides information to our school on the effectiveness of the services provided by our school. In addition, during our monthly Parent Association meetings, parents are encouraged to provide feedback regarding the quality of services we provide as a school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73 
