2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X252 School Name: MOTT HALL BRONX HIGH SCHOOL Principal: KATHRYN MALLOY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: MOTT HALL BRONX HIGH SCHOOL 09X252 320900011252 9-12 1595 BATHGATE AVE 718 466-6800 School Number (DBN): 718 466-6801 Phone Number: Stephanie Zaccardo Fax: szaccardo@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Kathryn Malloy Sharlene Simpson IshaTaylor Kathryn Malloy Greer Gardner FaizonTaylor, HailieEspinosa Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 9 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street Brooklyn NY 11201 718-923-5124 rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7696 Phone Number: 718 281-7519 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Field Support Center (FSC) Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: New Visions Affinity Executive Director: 131 Livingston St. Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: aanormaliza@schools.nyc.gov 718 935-2246 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kathryn Malloy Sharlene Simpson IshaTaylor DioniciaDircio FaizonTaylor JosueValle Abraham Ovalles *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member Elected UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Judith Nunez Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ elected parent Member / parent Member/ Parent Member/ parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Signature (Blue Ink) 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission: “Mott Hall Bronx High School uses a liberal arts curriculum to prepare students for college and empowers them personally and academically to succeed in an ever changing world.” 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Mott Hall is an International Baccalaureate (IB) school offering the Diploma Programme in 11 th and 12 th grades with an open admissions policy (any student may take IB classes regardless of grades or test scores). We believe in the program’s ability to provide high standards and prepare our students for the rigors of college and career. We use it as a guiding light for much of what we do in the school. The IB programme brings a high degree of rigor and coherence which we seek to imbue in all aspects of the school. IB’s influence is clear in our school culture, curriculum and assessments. Other significant partnerships include New Visions for Public Schools, College Bound Initiative (CBI), buildOn, and the Center for Supportive Schools. We are a Title 1 school with 90% of the students entitled to free or reduced lunch. Currently 25% of our students have IEPs. We offer flexible programming so students are programmed into the least restrictive environment for their core classes. We have expanded and continue to expand our Special Education faculty. The needs of these students vary and we seek to use the IEP creation and revision processes to negotiate how we meet these students’ needs. All of our content area teachers teach at least one Special Education class and participate in cycles of inquiry into how to best meet the students’ needs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Currently about 11% of our students are classified as English Language Learners (ELLs). We have students whose proficiency ranges from newcomers with no English to advanced students who are successful in our most rigorous IB courses. We have hired two additional ELL teachers who work closely with English and Social Studies teachers to customize lessons to meet the needs of our ELLs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We use the Framework for Great Schools as a tool to reflect upon our progress and to make plans for improvement. Some of our school's strengths are: providing a supportive and nurturing environment for our students and staff; specialized Periodic Assessments aligned to those from IB; inquiry-based PD cycles; a reflective culture focused on improvement; strong school community including quarterly “Mott Holla” celebrations of academic and personal achievement; monthly grade wide community meetings; distributed leadership and full alignment to the Common Core standards through the use of Atlas-Rubicon curriculum mapping software; and community service days. This past year we leveraged our instructional focus around using assessment in instruction.  Daily learning targets were derived from the CCLS.  Teachers learned the technique "framing the learning."  Teachers administered formative assessments of each of the standards assessed in the unit plan for that unit and gave individualized feedback to each student before administering the final, summative assessment for each unit. Students took teacher feedback and created learning plans which they carried out in order to improve their performance on the summative assessment.  One of the practices that bolsters our school community is Peer Group Connection (PGC). PGC is a program that helps ninth graders successfully transition to high school by training older students to serve as peer leaders. 2018-19 CEP 10  Our key areas of focus for this year include: ensuring students earn college ready scores on their Regents exams; engaging parents; and differentiating instruction for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X252 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 387 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 50 44 9 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 37 29 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 86.8% % Reduced Lunch 8.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 73.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.9 8% 42% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 80% 71% 78.6% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 54 51 86.0% 4.7% 24.3% 23.5% 0.8% 1.6% 4 38% 5.3 N/A N/A 75% 77% 84.4% 4% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our analysis revealed the following strengths: Increase in students earning College Ready scores on the CCLS ELA Regents from 2017 to 2018 Increased rate of students earning 10+ credits each year from 2017 to 2018    Growth shown in "Rigorous Instruction" and “Effective School Leadership” on the Framework for Great Schools Report Strong implementation of formative assessment in English.   High level of awareness of CCLS among teachers of content-area classes. Improved efficacy of Professional Development within the school  Improved curriculum design skill in the area of unpacking standards   Clear expectations around passing Regents needed for graduation.   We identified the following needs: Improved awareness of importance of earning college-ready scores on Regents exams -Increased use of formative assessment data by teachers, students and administrators. -Continued work on alignment to CCLS In the College Readiness metric there was great improvement, but there is still need to increase the number of students earning college-ready scores on Math and English Regents. Math scores are still significantly lower than English. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all students will have received multiple rounds of actionable feedback (at least four) on high-impact discipline-specific practices or literacy skills, resulting in a 2% increase in average Regents score on Global History and Algebra exams. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Content teams will analyze June 2018 Regents in order to isolate two Mathematical Practices (one for each semester) they will be given feedback on four times in a semester. All Algebra 1 students September Principal, AP overseeing Content Team Leader (CTL) Content Teams will design, implement and document an inquiry cycle around the first targeted MP. Math Content Team AP Sept- Feb during PD on Mondays Content Teams will report the results of their first round of inquiry to the school community All teachers November AP overseeing CTL Content Teams will give an mid-year report on progress to goal to the school community using the Algebra midterm data School Community February AP overseeing CTL Content Teams will engage in a second round of inquiry on the second targeted MP. Math Content Team Feb-May AP overseeing CTL Content Teams will give an update on progress toward goal using the Mock Regents Data School Community April AP overseeing CTL Content Teams will report their results and reflect on their inquiry for the year School community June AP overseeing CTL 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Expectations around rigor are communicated from parents' first engagement with Mott Hall. Our Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator and Grade Team Leader Coordinator convey the demands of the IB Programme and how they inform our program to families through 8th grade Open House sessions and Freshmen Orientation in the Spring. In the fall, the faculty share syllabi and expectations with families Back to School Night and Parent Conferences. Parents are given detailed feedback on their children's performance on mid-quarter progress reports in addition to report cards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 14  Human Resources:  Assistant Principal's time for planning PD and supporting content teams. Per session:  Content Team Leader receives Per-session to meet with AP  Content Team Leaders receive per-session to analyze data to be shared with staff OTPS:  Rubicon Curriculum Mapping Software  iO Education (formative grades are recorded here) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Benchmarks: January 2019: 35% of students earn 70 or higher on the Algebra midterm   April 2019: 40% of students earn 70 or higher on the Algebra Mock Regents Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Standards-based and Regents-aligned Midterm exam and Mock Regents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our Data Analysis revealed the following strengths and needs from the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey: Strengths:  88% of students say that they feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker room and cafeteria and 93% in their classrooms (up from 86% last year).  100% of families say that teachers and families think of each other as partners in educating children.  92% of students agreed that adults at their school encourage them to continue their education after high school. Needs:  55% of students report that their teachers notice when they are upset Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all staff will have participated in six staff circles around issues of implicit bias, restorative practices and building strong relationships with students. Select staff will receive coaching and feedback from a coach from the 100 Schools Project. This will result in improved course passing rates for at least 30% of a sample group of at-risk 10th graders over their performance last year. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Plan for staff circles All staff Participate in staff circles All staff Introduce 100 Schools coach and begin working with new teachers New teachers and selected returning teachers Approximately once per month Equity team with Ava Daniels from Morningside Center for overseen by Principal Approximately once per month Equity team overseen by Principal Sept-Oct and ongoing Amy Figeroa of Astor Services through the 100 Schools Project CR NSI Inquiry Team selects a target group of 5-12 10th graders CR NSI team September-Administration Check for progress with targeted students. Report to staff. Staff October November, Feb, April Administration Assign coach as needed or requested 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Select teachers Sep-June Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents engage in restorative circles: Over the summer re: uniforms; midway through the year: envisioning an ideal school; Spring: what is the role of parents in creating and sustaining a safe school environment? Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: 2018-19 CEP 17  Coverage/release time for staff to participate in circles. OPW and Parent Engagement time for Grade Teams Consultants: Morningside Center for Supportive Schools Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor progress at the end of November, the end of January (midpoint) and the beginning of April. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Marking period grades Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our data analysis revealed the following strengths:  100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers talk with one another about instruction.  92% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, teachers design instructional programs (e.g. lessons, units) together. Needs :  52% of teachers say that teachers help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom. (Q1a)  78% of students say that their teachers make the lessons relevant to their everyday life experiences. (Q1j)  60% of teachers say that teachers are eager to try new ideas. (Q1d) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have done at least one classroom inter visitation with a model teacher and 75% will have done two or more. Intervisitation includes a pre-observation conference, the inter visitation and a debrief in which the Model Teacher receives feedback. This will result in a 10% increase in the number of teachers positively reporting that teachers are eager to try new ideas on the school environment survey. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Announce the creation of the TL Pathways initiative and the three selected Model Teachers Staff Summer Newsletter Principal MTs meet to plan rollout to teachers Staff Late August MTs overseen by Model Teachers will facilitate classroom intervisitations All teachers Principal Sept-June Model Teachers overseen by AP MTs will report progress toward goal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers Monthly Sept-June Equity Team overseen by Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of the Model Teachers during Back to School night. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Funding the three MT positions with partial funding from the Office of Teacher Leadership. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 20  By January, 2019, 50% of teachers will have participated in an intervisitation with a model teacher. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Intervisitation Logs from Model Teachers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  92% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school understands how children learn.  100% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of developing instructional materials. (Q12d)  83% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision. (Q8f)  98% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school works to create a sense of community in the school. (Q3b)  97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school. (Q3c) Needs:  75% of teachers say that at their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it’s working. (Q8e) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, all teachers will show growth in at least two components in the Danielson framework. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Yearlong goals calendar showing the school goals, team goals and space for interim and final data reports will be created and shared. Teams will analyze data in order to report "baseline" data and set their goals for the year and share with the school community. Teams will give an interim report on progress to goal to the school community Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? all staff Mid-August Leadership Intern, Continuous Improvement Coach (CIC) and Principal All teams September All team leaders overseen by APs and CIC all teams November All teams overseen Teams will give an mid-year report on progress to goal to the school community all teams January Teams will give an interim report on progress to goal to the school community. all teams April Teams will "roll up" their final data, reflect on their progress and report to the school community. all teams June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement by APs and CIC All teams overseen by APs and CIC All teams overseen by APs and CIC All teams overseen by APs and CIC How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive quarterly email blast updates. (Similar to what will be shared with students during community meetings.) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Time for administrative team to meet  Paying iOEducation for the additional email and parent communication features. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 23  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teams will fill out a Google Form with their data analysis, goals, interim data, etc. Administration will use this as a check and report to the school community. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reports from teams will be in the form of Powerpoint presentations. Each team will fill out a google form that will populate a chart that is shared with the community. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data Analysis: Strengths:  93% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. (Q1a)  95% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school. (Q1c)  95% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. (Q1d)  95% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school. (Q1e)  98% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h)  87% of teachers say that staff regularly communicate with families about how they can help students learn. (Q9d) Needs:  59% of teachers say that families are offered opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. (Q9a)  48% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. (Q4a) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019:  60% of parents will have participated in one of the following events: Back to School Night, Fall Gala, PGC Family Night, Family Dinner, Spring Event (TBD), Mott Holla, Mott Hall Olympics, Career Day or chaperoning a field trip. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Formation of a new Family Engagement Team Mott Hall Gala Winter/Spring event 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All families and the community All community members All community members Sept-June LEAP intern overseeing FET November LEAP intern overseeing FET Feb-April LEAP intern overseeing FET If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Center for Supportive Schools; buildOn Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Release time for LEAP intern  Costs associated with advertising the events including postage  Administrative Assistant time devoted to coordination, planning and implementing Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. After the fall gala, the team will tabulate and share participation numbers. They will set a goal for the Winter/Spring event. After the Winter/Spring event, they will do the same. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Team meeting minutes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27 Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) scoring at a level 1 on 8th grade ELA exam and/or teacher referral Failing Mathematics course and/or teacher referral Reading Plus Program Guided Reading Program Tutoring Failing Science course Tutoring Failing Social Studies course Tutoring Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small class After school Small class Small group or one to one After school After school Small group or one to one Small group or one to one After school After school At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Attendance rate below 90% High rate of disciplinary issues Counseling Small group or individual During school day Grade Team referral Teacher referral 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 5 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We purchase school supplies, school uniforms and provide counseling services to all students in the STH population. In addition, we lend out laptops to students in temporary housing that do not have access to technology. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Hiring Team uses school-created criteria for hiring decisions. Teachers are offered leadership pathways such as the Model Teacher role being piloted this year. Staff are encouraged to attend PD of their choosing and granted funding and/or release time to attend. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We use Rubicon-Atlas to monitor teacher creation and modification of curriculum. In addition, all teachers are engaged in inquiry around how to monitor for student learning throughout the class and not just at the end with an exit ticket or with an exam. Through the inquiry process, teaches will explore various strategies to be able to adjust their teacher to meet student needs by understand the standards that they are or are not mastering. Teachers are also engaging in intervisitations within our school and in other schools to observe best practices of assessing student learning throughout a lesson. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 31  n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet in teams to discuss need for alternate assessment measures. ESL and Special Education teachers work with General Ed teachers to design and implement alternative assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 12, 15, 17, 19 17 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 331,006 0 12,366.00 0 x x 2018-19 CEP 32  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,695,080.00 x 12, 15, 17, 21 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 CEP 33  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X252, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Mott Hall Bronx High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 36  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Mott Hall Bronx High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 37  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● PGC parent night ● College Night ● FAFSA workshops Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 38  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parents and guardians agree to: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: Students agree to: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 40  2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Mott Hall offers an after school Literacy Program to support the needs of our ELLs. In reviewing our data, it became clear that most of our ELL students have low literacy skills across all content areas. Specifically, when looking at the NYSESLAT scores for our ELL population, we have an overwhelming majority of Expanding level students. Their reading scores are the the lowest out of the modalities. Also, in speaking with the students and asking what they feel is difficult, most students respond saying that “reading is hard” and what’s what they wanted to work on most. Because of this, we designed an after school program to specifically target the needs of those ELL students through reading intervention. The teachers running this program are all certified ENL teachers, one of whom is also certified in English Language Arts. This program takes place on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays after school from 3:30pm-5:00pm. The ELLs are broken up by NYSESLAT levels. The lower level group, made up of Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and the lower Expanding students (a total of 10 students) meets on Wednesdays with our ELL Coordinator and certified ENL teacher, Lauren Cunningham. The first advanced group, made up of 14 Expanding students, meets on Tuesdays with another certified ENL teacher, Allye McDaniel. The second advanced group, made up of 14 Expanding students, meets on Thursdays with Abraham Ovalles. The majority of our ELL students are at the Expanding level (25 out of 38), so we are working on bolstering literacy skills to ensure that the students are continuing to grow and are moving towards proficiency. We have a total of 38 ELL students and we are hoping this program will engage 100% of the ELLs currently enrolled in our school. This after school program begins Tuesday, September 25th and runs until Thursday, June 6th, for 90 sessions. The foundation of this support will be teacher-led intervention and instruction. The MaxScholar program, which helps build fluency and even decoding skills through Common Core aligned reading intervention, will also be used as an additional supplement for our most struggling readers (10 students). This program is done online through the MaxScholar website and is a distinct program from that which will be used in regular instruction throughout the day. This program is used by schools with a larger ELL population, so we are confident that it will be helpful to our students. Mott Hall completed a trial administration of a similar program, the Reading Plus program in previous years and saw improvement in the ELL students who participated. Now, with MaxScholar’s added decoding and phonics portions, we feel this program will be a better fit for our students and their needs. The MaxScholar license cost for 10 students is $400 and comes out of our Title III funds. As students work in MaxScholar, the teacher will monitor student progress via the teacher dashboard included in the program. In an effort to best support our students, teachers in charge of the program will also communicate on a monthly basis with the students' other teachers so everyone is abreast of the students' progress. For those who are not using the MaxScholar program, the above mentioned teachers will meet with the leveled student groups on the designated after school days. 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Attendance will be taken daily by the administrative assistant in charge of after school program attendance. Records are held in the main office and in a spreadsheet that tracks attendance in after school program. Parents are notified via a letter home that contains the schedule for the after school program options in both English and Spanish. Additionally, students are informed of the after school schedule and are encouraged to come on the day for their assigned group. The three ENL teachers are highly qualified in ENL. All teachers will be paid per session at the rate of $60.65. Sixty percent of our allocated budget will go towards paying the per session rate of the three ENL teachers running the after school literacy support program. The language of instruction for all of these sessions is English, but students can have translation into Spanish or French when needed. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Mott Hall provides teacher run professional development sessions. Lauren Cunningham, a certified ENL teacher who is highly qualified, will facilitate the PD. She will go over best practices for English Language Learners. Teachers will produce artifacts to use with ELL students and look at supplemental materials from the MaxScholar program that can be used offline. All staff members running the after school literary support and MaxScholar program for ELLs will participate in these sessions. All staff in attendance and those running PD will be paid per session, at the rate of $60.65. There will be 3 PD sessions. - The first, on Wednesday, October 3, 2018 from 3:15-4:15pm will focus on vocabulary development for ELLs and ELLs with disabilities. - The second, on Wednesday, October 17, 2018 from 3:15-4:15pm will focus on reading comprehension strategies for ELLs and ELLs with disabilities. - The third and final PD, on Wednesday, November 7, 2018 from 3:15-4:15pm will focus on additional comprehension strategies as well as ways for teachers to modify documents and make them more accessible for ELLs and ELLs with disabilities. Additionally, the teachers involved in the after school literacy program also participate in interactive webinars given by the MaxScholar program which instructs teachers on how to help students use the program and also ways in which teachers can use the various pieces of the program to bolster the skills of the ELLs in different modalities. The first MaxScholar webinar is on September 18th from 3:30-5:30pm. The cost of each webinar is $495.00. Teachers will be paid per session ($60.65) for the time spent after school participating in the interactive webinar. Follow-up sessions (1-2) are scheduled based on teacher need periodically during the year. The activities that support this program are the ELL Common Core Content Team meetings and the ELL Department meetings which occur weekly on Mondays, from 2:25-2:55pm. During these meetings the three ENL teachers in the after school program review data from the literacy program and plan interventions and supports based on this data. In addition, they also create interventions for other content teachers to implement based upon the students' strengths and areas for growth. 2018-19 CEP 44  Part C: Professional Development Ten percent of our allocated budget will go towards paying the per session rate of the two teachers facilitating and the three teachers attending the PD for the after school literacy support program and covering the cost of the MaxScholar interactive webinar ($495). Attendance at all Professional Development sessions will be taken and maintained by the ELL Coordinator, Lauren Cunningham.This professional development will positively impact the progress of the ELLs at Mott Hall by providing teachers with specific strategies and methods of intervention to support our ELLs, especially those that struggle in reading. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> In addition to parental communication surrounding our ENL program, Mott Hall works to involve parents in all aspects of school life. Mott Hall sends home all communication, including phone calls, letters and flyers, in two languages, English and Spanish, and offers translation at all parent meetings. Documents are also translated into French as needed by our French-speaking certified ENL teacher. When necessary, for the few parents and families that speak languages other than Spanish or French at home Mott Hall makes use of the translation unit at the DOE and the over-the-phone services offered by the Language Line. We send home the NYSESLAT Parent Score reports in English and Spanish, and also French for the families of our French and Arabic speaking ELL students. Our parent coordinator speaks English and Spanish and works closely with all parents, including ELL parents, to involve them in the school. During Parent Teacher conferences we assign bilingual teachers who have volunteered to help translate to go around with parents and translate for them as they engage with teachers and staff. We annually host a family dinner, fundraising events, and grade specific meetings for parents, for which we translate all documents and flyers into Spanish and provide translators at the events, paid per session if they are outside of the school day. We have our Peer Group Connection (mentoring program that pairs upperclassmen with freshman and sophomore students) Family Night on October 17, 2018 from 6-8pm, to celebrate the work students have done and to show parents what the program is all about. The event is facilitated by ENL teacher Abraham Ovalles. Translation and the event is at no cost to Title III. On November 9, 2018 from 6-8pm we have a Family Dinner for the students and families of our seniors, along with our staff. The event is facilitated by teacher Rashida Heslop. Translation and the event is at no cost to Title III. We have a BuildOn celebration to recognize the community service contributions of our staff and students through our partnership with that program on May 23, 2019 from 4-6pm. The event is facilitated by BuildOn program associate Braulio Acuria. Translation and the event is at no cost to Title III. Our our orientation for new freshman families occurs on June 4, 2019 from 5-7pm. The event is facilitated by ENL teacher Abraham Ovalles. Translation and the event is at no cost to Title III. Our graduation happens on June 24, 2019 from 5-7pm. The event is facilitated by teacher Rashida Heslop. Translation and the event is at no cost to Title III. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Mott Hall also runs regular focus groups to evaluate the needs of and get feedback from parents as we work toward continual school improvement. Translation is provided for these focus groups by the Parent Coordinator. Parents are regularly invited to all school assemblies and school events. If ELL parents attend these events, an ENL teacher is on hand to translate. These funds will not come out of our Title III money, but from our translation budget like those events previously mentioned, when the events occur outside the school day. A community circle for all parents and families, including ELL families, is on November 2, 2018 from 8:30-9:30am. Since it is during the school day, ENL teachers are available to translate, but at no cost. In addition to our regular outreach to ELL parents, this year we are offering two sessions which communicate opportunities for students at Mott Hall and offer support for parents as they face the challenges of raising teenagers. The first session offered to parents is about Graduation Requirements and Transcript Review and is given by our Director of College Counseling, Mariela Regalado. The second session is about Financial Aid and the College Application Process and is also given by Mariela Regalado. These sessions will take place during Parent Teacher Conferences on November 29, 2018 and November 30, 2018 from 6-7pm. We will pay a certified ENL teacher per session ($60.65) to stay for each event and reach out to ELL parents that attend. Again, this will not come out of Title III funds. The funds will come from our translation budget. For the after school literacy program in particular, the ENL teachers will prepare monthly reports about students' attendance and progress towards reading fluency. These reports will be translated into Spanish by our ENL teachers. This will serve all of our ELL students whose home language is Spanish. Reports will also be generated in French by a French-speaking ENL teacher, Allye McDaniel. All of the documents, including invitations, announcements, flyers and notices, are sent home in parents’ preferred languages, but always in both English and Spanish. Sending home notices in English and Spanish makes documents available in the overwhelmingly preferred languages of our parents, guardians and families. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 9 School Name Mott Hall Bronx High School Borough Bronx School Number 252 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kathryn Malloy Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lauren Cunningham/ENL Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Stephanie Zaccardo Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent Martha Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Gicary Peguero Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 394 2018-19 CEP 48 Total number of ELLs 52 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.20%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In order to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs we use teacher-created assessments and data from the NYSESLAT, when available, and the NYSITELL for newly identified ELLs. Looking at the writing samples allow us to determine the level and complexity of the writing skills for each ELL student, as well as identify areas of improvement in vocabulary, grammar, sentence structure, and complexity. Reading comprehension information gives us an idea of the comprehension abilities of our ELLs, and data from the speaking and listening portions of the assessments illustrate the capacity of each student in those areas. Overall, the data demonstrates that our ELLs are stronger in speaking and listening, and struggle more in writing and reading. This data is used in instructional planning to drive areas of focus and intervention in ENL and content classes, as the areas of weakness of our ELLs generally coincide with the difficulties of many of our struggling non-ELL students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 49  We have an ENL Team made up of the ENL teachers in each grade level that meets weekly to discuss the progress of our ELL students, reflects on data, and creates interventions and modifications as needed. Additionally, this team monitors the progress of each student through structured check-ins throughout the year in which each ELL student reflects on his or her own progress and sets goals for their language development. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs through looking at data - such as NYSESLAT scores, periodic assessments, graduation rates, college acceptance rates, Regents Scores, report card grades, and student and teacher interviews. Using all of these elements allow us to get a detailed picture of how our ELLs are performing, how they feel about their performance and support, how their teachers feel, and also how our programs are meeting the needs of our students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered, the ENL Team reviews the data and modifies or differentiates instruction to meet student needs. The team also supports classroom teachers in modifying their instruction to meet the diverse needs of our ENL population. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across performance levels on the NYSESLAT indicate that we have the largest number of students at the Expanding/Advanced level and then at the Transitioning/High Intermediate level. In terms of instruction, this means that we need to continue to support our ELLs at all levels, while pushing those students at the higher levels towards proficiency through honing their academic and language skills. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL Team meets and reviews all data. The ENL Coordinator, who leads the team, also has weekly meetings with administration to discuss student progress and program effectiveness. Beyond this, data is disseminated to teachers and staff through ELL Student Profiles -- which include individualized goals, reflections, and data for each ELL student -- compiled at the start of the year and updated periodically. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELLs are programmed into a standalone ENL class that meets 4 hours per week (if needed based on their NYSESLAT level) and a co-taught ELA class that serves as the integrated ENL course that meets 4 hours per week. Additionally, some of our ELLs have an ELL teacher co-teaching their history courses that meet 4 hours per week, allowing us to meet minute requirements for all levels of ELLs. Students are programmed to travel as a block for their courses, creating a heterogeneous group. 2018-19 CEP 50  b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As explained above, for our freestanding ENL program we have an ENL class in each grade that meets 4 days per week for a total of 228 minutes for those at the Entering and Emerging levels and a co-taught ELA class in each grade that serves as the integrated ENL course that meets 4 days per week for a total of 228 minutes. Additionally, some of our ELLs have an ELL teacher co-teaching in their history courses in each grade that meet 4 days per week, allowing up to 228 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. With each of these courses combined, we are beyond the required minutes for Entering level students, who would require the most ENL instruction at 540 minutes total, receiving 684 minutes at the Entering and Emerging levels. ELLs at the Transitioning and Expanding levels receive their full minutes, 180 minutes per week, through their Integrated ELA/ENL course and integrated ENL/History course. We only have a freestanding ENL program. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in the freestanding ENL model through co-teaching in ELA and through small group instruction in history, math, and science courses. There is no ELL teacher in math and science classes. Core content teachers differentiate for their ELL students with their ENL co-teachers or any ENL teacher and the ENL Coordinator as a resource and support in aligning instruction to Common Core Learning Standards, while also being appropriate for the student's level of language acquisition. Instruction is done in English, but native language support is provided at varying levels based on the level of each ELL student. Our ENL teachers can provide oral language support in Spanish and French, and written language support in both of those languages as well as any others needed, through use of the Translation and Interpretation Unit’s services. We offer small group instruction in homogeneous groups as often as possible. Our beginner ENL students receive the most frequent and direct instruction via our push-in, pull-out, and co-teaching teaching models. Our intermediate and advanced ENL students receive services primarily via our co-teaching teaching model. In the co-teaching model, the ENL teacher works with the content teachers using the elements of the SIOP model. Our ELLs are grouped together in smaller ELA classes along with non-ELL students. We offer multiple activities and projects to extend language acquisition in all four modalities. The ENL teacher works with the ELLs to target specific language acquisition learning objectives in addition to the content. We simultaneously work with students on developing their BIC skills and CAL proficiencies. The ENL teacher also assists in preparing lesson plans and modifying the curriculum to address the learning needs of our ELLs. The ELA and ENL teachers in 11th, and some 12th, grade ELA courses work together to prepare both the ELLs and non-ELLs for the Regents Exam in June 2016. We collaboratively develop and deliver an inquiry-based curriculum that engages all students in meaningful, effective ways. ELLs are given opportunities to write in a variety of genres and to develop literary analysis skills. The ENL teacher supports the ELA teacher in modifying instruction, materials and assessment to better fit the needs of ELLs. The ENL teacher supports and works with the ELLs to build language acquisition and proficiency across all modalities as well as content comprehension and literacy skills. In all three instructional models (co-teaching, pull-out, and push-in), the ENL teacher and content area teachers frequently use the following sheltered instruction methods to make content comprehensible and accessible to ELLs: • Communicate learning (and language) objectives and agenda to students clearly and visually. • Make texts, handouts and visuals accessible to all students without “watering down” the content. • Use graphic organizers and schematic visuals to help students understand both the parts of and whole concept. • Use guided notes and pre-prepared outlines to help students take notes in an organized manner. • Emphasize annotating (highlighting, underlining, taking marginal notes, asking questions, etc.) as a reading comprehension strategy across all content areas. 2018-19 CEP 51  • Supplement lessons with hands-on manipulatives, realia, multimedia (film clips, songs, etc.), visuals (pictures, charts, overheads, maps, timelines, etc.), step-by-step demonstrations, and related materials to make lessons clear and meaningful. • Make connections to students’ prior knowledge and past experience to new concepts and content. • Review and contextualize key vocabulary terms that are critical to understanding the lesson’s and unit’s concepts. • Use cloze sentences to teach and review vocabulary in context. • Use multiple modalities to expose students to new terminology and to increase retention. • Encourage students to self-select vocabulary words to look up and learn in their own writing. • Build content-specific word walls to display and revisit key vocabulary words throughout units. • Present visual representations of vocabulary for students to associate meaning with the words. • Use speech that is appropriate to the students’ proficiency level and model correct English. • Present instructions visually and orally in an organized, step-by-step manner. • Demonstrate correct use of the language via think-aloud and read-aloud instructional methods. • Use scaffolding techniques throughout the lesson • Use a variety of grouping structures to encourage peer-to-peer interaction and cooperation (whole class, small group, and partnering). • Use a variety of question types to promote students asking a variety of questions. • Use a variety of instructional strategies to present content in new and engaging ways. • Encourage cooperative learning activities and opportunities for students to work together. • Give students frequent opportunities to practice reading comprehension and learning strategies. • Give students frequent opportunities to apply knowledge in order to master content concepts and language skills. • Give students regular feedback to students to clarify, discuss, and correct responses. • Integrate all language modalities and learning styles into lesson plans on a regular basis. • Develop unit and lesson plans that engage students in a meaningful, effect way. • Differentiate instruction and assessment based on student abilities. • Review key concepts during and at the end of lesson and check for learning informally and formally. • Provide students with multiple assessments – informal, formal and authentic – to demonstrate mastery of the content objectives. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? For the overwhelming majority of our ELLs, Spanish is their home language. Evaluating students in Spanish throughout the year can be done by ENL teachers and also through taking the NYS Regents Examinations in Spanish, depending on the content of the test. This allows us to see the content skills of the students, as separate from their language abilities. For students who speak other home languages, additional translations of the Regents Examinations are available, depending on the test. For our non Spanish-speaking ELLs, testing in the home language can be done through translated curricular support materials and using the Translation and Interpretation Unit services. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status For our SIFE students we use the differentiation strategies that we use for our other ELL students, taking their level into account, but we also look for gaps in academic and social skills that need extra instruction and support students in acquiring those skills. For our newcomer ELLs, we focus more heavily on basic interpersonal language skills so that students are able to communicate their wants and needs and be a part of the social community at school, as they start to build skills in the academic realm as well. For our developing ELLs there is more of a balance. We work on basic language skills and also academic vocabulary so that the students can function in their content classrooms and keep acquiring language and content from their classes. For our long-term ELLs we focus on individual areas of weakness, often writing and reading, and assist them in bolstering their skills in these areas. Our former ELLs receive support for two years in whatever areas are demonstrated necessary, also often writing and reading. 2018-19 CEP 52  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies and materials that the teachers of ELL-SWDs use are often teacher crafted or inspired by EngageNY. Differentiated and scaffolded materials are created keeping age, grade level, and ability in mind, while also aligning to the Common Core Learning Standards. These materials and strategies include chunked and/or leveled readings, guiding questions, additional spotlighting of vocabulary and key terms, visuals, use of technology, and use of glossaries. Additionally, ELL-SWDs are in co-taught ENL and integrated ENL/History classes to provide access to both content and lanauge development. Beyond this, pull-out instruction is provided by an ELL teacher on an as needed basis for additional support. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs are programmed in order to meet their minutes for both their Special Education and ELL services. ELA courses are co-taught by an ENL teacher and allow for ELL-SWDs to work on their literacy and language skills with support from a content teacher and a specialist. History courses have an ELL section with an ENL teacher that supports students in reaching their language and IEP goals. Entering and Emerging level students also have a standalone ENL course in which they work on language skills and other academic skills. Flexible programming is used to maximize the time our ELL-SWDs spend with their non-disabled peers. The ENL teachers and the Special Education team meet in order to determine which ELL-SWDs are able to be in ICT classes based on their needs as ELLs and as noted in their IEPs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELLs are programmed in an ELA class co-taught by an ENL teacher. This allows for targeted instruction in language and literacy in the ELA classroom. In global history and U.S. history the ENL teacher pushes-in/pulls-out for the ELLs according to their levels and needs. Currently, our lowest level ELLs are in a reading intervention program that meets five times per week to work on silent reading, vocabulary, and visual training to improve field of view. For our ELLs struggling outside of these two content areas, there are pull-out groups with an ELL teacher to work on literacy and language skills across content areas. Additional ELL support needed in math and science comes from non-ENL co-teachers who provide verbal and written home language support in Spanish, which is the language of the overwhelming majority of our ELL students. Intervention services are most often offered in English. All ENL teachers also speak Spanish and can provide oral and written home language support to our Spanish-speaking ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our school is creating a standalone ENL class and continuing the co-teaching model as described previously. We feel that this addition will increase the ability of our ELLs to receive language instruction and support in the skills that they need to be successful in high school and college. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have access to all school programs, the same as any other student. Where the level of language is an impediment, there are supports in place - including staff who speak the home language of many of our ELLs, Spanish, and also many students who speak other languages that help, include and support our ELL students in all school programs. We have an after school program for our ELL students, open to all ELLs, that meets twice a week for two and a half hours each time. This is a time when the ENL teachers do additional language instruction, content support, and academic readiness instruction. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 53  The instructional materials that teachers use to support ELLs are often teacher crafted or inspired by EngageNY. Differentiated and scaffolded materials are created keeping age, grade level, and ability in mind, while also aligning to the Common Core Learning Standards. These materials include chunked and/or leveled readings (from sources like News ELA) and books, as well as tranlated copies of readings in the home language of the student. Including visuals into teacher-created materials to aid in understanding and support language acquisition is done to support our ELL students. Also, students are provided with glossaries in content classes to find word-to-word translations. We have an online reading intervention program, Reading Plus, that increases reading comprehension skills and vocabulary acquisition while fostering reading stamina. For our struggling readers we use the Journeys series to improve reading skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We have only ENL at our school. Home language support is delivered as needed based on the language level of the student. All ELL students are provided with dictionaries in classrooms to aid in vocabulary understanding and acquisition. Content-area glossaries are provided for ELLs to use during their classes and also on assessments (including NYS Regents Exams) for one-to-one word translations into their home language. Beyond vocabulary support, we provide visual support as often as possible in materials given to students and posted in classrooms. Technological supports are also provided to our ELLs as we have many laptops and iPads available for a variety of needs, such as translation of words or looking up background information. We provide peer support to our ELLs through strategic grouping on for classes and table groups within those classes. New ELL students are also paired with a student buddy to support the transition to a new school environment. Home language support can be delivered orally and in writing by on-site Spanish and French-speaking staff members. Other home language support can be delivered via written curricular support materials and supplements and use of the Translation and Interpretation Unit, if necessary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. As with instruction for all of our students, our school ensures that the services and resources we provided are developmentally and academically appropriate for our students, including our ELLs. Curricular materials and resources often come with grade bands, lexile levels, and/or suggested ages, which can be used to help gauge at which grade levels and for what ages to use the materials. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The instructional materials that teachers use to support ELLs are often teacher crafted or inspired by EngageNY. Differentiated and scaffolded materials are created keeping age, grade level, and ability in mind, while also aligning to the Common Core Learning Standards. These materials include chunked and/or leveled readings (from sources like News ELA) and books, as well as tranlated copies of readings in the home language of the student. Including visuals into teacher-created materials to aid in understanding and support language acquisition is done to support our ELL students. Also, students are provided with glossaries in content classes to find word-to-word translations. We have an online reading intervention program, Reading Plus, that increases reading comprehension skills and vocabulary acquisition while fostering reading stamina. For our struggling readers we use the Journeys series to improve reading skills. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When parents come to the school to enroll their student, ELLs included, they are given information about our school, our programs, and the services available to our student populations and groups (ELLs, SWDs). Our Parent Coordinator and our office staff give out this information to parents upon enrollment. For new ELLs who enroll during the year, the same happens. The ENL Coordinator also meets with the students individually to check in about their needs and experiences in order to support them in their transition, as previously described. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language option in our school for all students is French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 CEP 54  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In order to follow the new regulations of CR Part 154, ENL certified teachers must receive 50% of professional development aligned to ELL teaching, with the remainder of the staff receiving 15% of their professional development around ELL data, strategy, and instruction. Since essentially all teachers at the school teach ELLs in some capacity, professional development plans include starting the year by reviewing ELL data - names, numbers, skills, previous NYSESLAT scores, home languages, strengths and weaknesses of students based on prior experience teaching them; then continuing throughout the year with sessions about best practices and strategies for teaching ELLs and ELLs with special needs. ELL certified teachers will receive a larger amount of professional development in these areas. Every Monday afternoon teachers break into groups and ELL teachers have time to work with both other ELL teachers and also their specific content-area co-teachers to create supports for ELL students and discuss content and language progress. Wednesday mornings the ENL department meets to discuss student progress, review anecdotal and assessment data, and devise supports for our students and strategies for the teachers in our school. Outside professional development is also used to support our ELL staff. ELL staff can then provide ongoing professional development for content-area teachers on staff. There is an ELL-specific professional development portion during our new teacher orientation and training in August before the start of the year, which takes place over 3 full days. We contract a specialist to work with our entire staff on aligning our instruction and instructional planning to the Common Core Learning Standards, which includes a focus on differentiation for our ELL students by our ELL teachers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our ENL teachers and ENL Coordinator have individual meetings with each ELL student throughout the year to check in on progress, notify them of NYSESLAT scores from the previous year and upcoming testing later in the year, among other things. All of our incoming 9th graders are in a class called College 101 that helps them get ready for high school and college and, hopefully, eases the transition from middle school into high school. All students, ELLs included have a teacher that they know they can go to with any difficulties, whether academic or personal. We also have a program called Peer Group Connection (PGC) run by staff and students. PGC is a program in which upperclassmen mentor underclassmen, also allowing students support in their transition. The students are very well-supported. Since essentially all teachers at the school teach ELLs in some capacity, professional development plans include starting the year by reviewing ELL data, as mentioned above, and then continuing throughout the year with sessions about best practices and strategies for teaching ELLs and ELLs with special needs. ELL certified teachers will receive a 50% of their professional development in these areas (through on-site and outside professional development). Records of the professional development are kept by the ENL Coordinator and the Professional Development Team at our school site. This includes tracking hours and keeping agendas from each session. 2018-19 CEP 55  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides annual individual meetings with parents and families of ELLs on a rolling basis, starting in September. The ENL Coordinator attempts to schedule meetings with each family, going alphabetically through our list of ELLs. If a family is not able to make a meeting when contacted the first time, the ENL Coordinator skips over that family and continues down the list, circling back to those who were unavailable once the list is completed. Meetings are scheduled for during the day and after school, depending on parental availability, and are likely to be completed in quarters 1 and 2. Translation is available on-site for Spanish and French-speaking families. Any additional languages needed are translated using the Translation and Interpretation Unit’s over-the-phone translation services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The ENL Coordinator keeps records of the annual individual meetings with ELL parents in the ENL binders that contain copies of important documents. Note is taken of the date, parent(s) in attendance, and a summary of what is discussed about the student and his/her progress. Documentation of outreach is also kept in the ENL binders. Translation services are available for any parents who might need them through on-site translation (into Spanish or French) and over-the-phone translation into any other home languages in our school provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. ELL parents are invited to all activities along with the non-ELL parents at our school, with appropriate documents being sent home in the preferred home language (such as Peer Group Connection mentoring program Family Night, Family Dinner for our seniors and their families, College and financial aid information night) by our school's Parent Coordinator. Our Parent Coordinator speaks both English and Spanish, allowing her to communicate effectively with all of our families. Our ELL parent orientation meeting at the start of the year is specifically for ELL parents, as are our individual ELL conferences. It is explained to all parents that they are welcome in the school at any time and may help out with events and trips if they so choose. Translation services are available for any parents who might need them through on-site translation (into Spanish or French) and over-the-phone translation into any other home languages in our school provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 56 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kathryn Malloy, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Mott Hall Bronx High School School DBN: 09X252 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kathryne Malloy Title Principal Stephanie Zaccardo Assistant Principal Gicary Peguero Parent Coordinator Lauren Cunningham ENL/Bilingual Teacher Martha Rodriguez Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 4/22/17 4/22/17 4/22/17 4/22/17 4/22/17 2018-19 CEP 58 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Mott Hall Bronx High School Superintendent: Juan Mendez DBN: 09X252 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lauren Cunningham ENL Coordinator/LAC Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The ELL Coordinator, Lauren Cunningham, examined the Home Language Identification Surveys, ATS information (RAPL report), and Emergency Contact cards in order to find the preferred language of the families at our school. Additionally, she followed up with the students and parents whose home language is not English or Spanish to assess what kind of translation and interpretation services would be needed. Our Parent Coordinator, who speaks both English and Spanish, also assists in contacting families and providing both oral and written translation into Spanish. When we have new students enroll, we also use their HLIS and Emergency Contact card in order to find the home language and preferred language of contact (both spoken and written) of any new families. If a family member or guardian enters the school but cannot communicate in English, School Safety at our entryway and staff in our main office have copies of the cards and brochures provided in the Language Access Coordinator kit that allow the person to point to the language they speak. If it is not one of the languages spoken on site (English, Spanish, French), the Language Line is used for immediate communication needs. 2018-19 CEP 59  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic French Bengali Setswana Twi 336 258 3 2 2 1 1 55.63 42.72 .5 .33 .33 .17 .17 333 263 3 1 2 0 1 55.13 43.54 .5 .17 .33 0 .17 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Uniform and behavior expectation policy, a school calendar, and the first parent-teacher conference notice September Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the 2018-19 CEP 60  After school program information, testing dates and the January Regents examination schedule October Mock Regents and midterm examination information, Saturday School notice and schedule, and yearly Family Dinner invitation November January Regents information December translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered 2018-19 CEP 61  NYSESLAT testing information and schedule February Information about final examinations, June Regents, graduation and Saturday school. May Freshman Orientation Flyer for June event May languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and 2018-19 CEP 62  ESL teacher individual conferences notice ongoing throughout year - beginning in September Peer Group Connection (mentoring program that pairs upperclassmen with freshman and sophomore students) Family Night October BuildOn celebration to recognize the community service contributions May notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly 2018-19 CEP 63  Information about IEP meetings will be sent home throughout the year, as mandated by the Special Education case worker assigned to each ELL student with special needs. ongoing throughout the year College and financial aid information night presented by our College Office January Parent-Teacher conference notices included in monthly mailer prior to conference mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is 2018-19 CEP 64  Monthly Calendar monthly - included in monthly mailer documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. As these are documents we use year after year, they have been previously translated. Any new language translations needed (aside from Spanish and French, which are on site) are submitted to the Translation & Interpretation Unit as soon as a new preferred language is documented. These documents are sent home as part of our monthly mailer, which aggregates and mails home important documents and notices for each month of the school year. If there are any non-covered languages requested, we contact a translation service to contract the translation of the necessary documents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences (4) Sept 28, Nov 9-10, Mar 8-9, May 3 interpretation service(s)? As this is a yearly event, our plan remains the same each year -- to ensure that there are interpreters present, bilingual staff are assigned to parents as necessary. Bilingual teachers conduct many of their conferences in a language other than English. If there is a parent or family member that needs interpretation in a language we do not have in house (outside of English, Spanish, French, Russian, Italian) , the Language Line can be used for in the moment translation, or if known in advance that the attendee needs a specific language, 2018-19 CEP 65  IEP Meetings ongoing ELL Individual Conferences ongoing PGC Family Night October the school can contract an interpreter to be on-site for the event. As this is a constantly occurring event, our plan remains the same -- to ensure that there are interpreters present, bilingual staff are assigned to meetings as necessary. If there is a parent or family member that needs interpretation in a language we do not have in house (outside of English, Spanish, French, Russian, Italian) , the Language Line can be used for in the moment translation, or if known in advance that the attendee needs a specific language, the school can contract an interpreter to be on-site for the event. As this is a constantly occurring event, our plan remains the same -- to ensure that there are interpreters present, bilingual staff are assigned to meetings as necessary. If there is a parent or family member that needs interpretation in a language we do not have in house (outside of English, Spanish, French, Russian, Italian) , the Language Line can be used for in the moment translation, or if known in advance that the attendee needs a specific language, the school can contract an interpreter to be on-site for the event. As this is a yearly event, our plan remains the same -- to ensure that there are interpreters present, bilingual staff are assigned to parents as necessary. If there is a parent or family member that needs interpretation in a language we do not have in house (outside of English, Spanish, French, Russian, Italian) , the Language Line can be used for in the moment translation, or if known in advance that the attendee needs a specific language, the school can contract an interpreter to be on-site for the event. Additionally, portions of the event are translated into Spanish, as that is the overwhelmingly preferred language after English in our community. 2018-19 CEP 66  Family Dinner December College Info Night January BuildOn Celebration May As this is a yearly event, our plan remains the same -- to ensure that there are interpreters present, bilingual staff are assigned to parents as necessary. If there is a parent or family member that needs interpretation in a language we do not have in house (outside of English, Spanish, French, Russian, Italian) , the Language Line can be used for in the moment translation, or if known in advance that the attendee needs a specific language, the school can contract an interpreter to be on-site for the event. Additionally, portions of the event are translated into Spanish, as that is the overwhelmingly preferred language after English in our community. As this is a yearly event, our plan remains the same -- to ensure that there are interpreters present, bilingual staff are assigned to parents as necessary. If there is a parent or family member that needs interpretation in a language we do not have in house (outside of English, Spanish, French, Russian, Italian) , the Language Line can be used for in the moment translation, or if known in advance that the attendee needs a specific language, the school can contract an interpreter to be on-site for the event. Additionally, portions of the event are translated into Spanish, as that is the overwhelmingly preferred language after English in our community. Since there are formal presentations, parents/families are grouped by language and given presentations in their preferred language. As this is a yearly event, our plan remains the same -- to ensure that there are interpreters present, bilingual staff are assigned to parents as necessary. If there is a parent or family member that needs interpretation in a language we do not have in house (outside of English, Spanish, French, Russian, Italian) , the Language Line can be used for in the 2018-19 CEP 67  Graduation June moment translation, or if known in advance that the attendee needs a specific language, the school can contract an interpreter to be on-site for the event. Additionally, portions of the event are translated into Spanish, as that is the overwhelmingly preferred language after English in our community. Portions of the event are translated into Spanish, as that is the overwhelmingly preferred language after English in our community. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school has many Spanish-speaking staff members who can contact parents and families at any time. Additionally, we also have multiple French speakers, one Italian speaker, and one Russian speaker on-site who can easily communicate with families in the event of an emergency. If interpretation was needed for additional languages not spoken on site, we would use the Language Line service in order to get immediate language support in whatever language necessary. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. It is important for all students and families to be heard and supported. In an effort to ensure that this happens, our school ensures that all staff members are aware of how to use the translation and over-the-phone interpretation services provided by the DOE through dissemination of resources via email and in person, including an all-staff meeting at the start of the year that outlines the procedures for using the services. An email is sent out at the start of the year with the resources needed for all staff members to be able to use these services. This includes links to the translation and interpretation services unit website, steps for contacting interpreters over-the-phone, and steps for securing translated documents (from staff members, the DOE website, or the translation and interpretation services unit). All staff members also receive a copy of the “I Speak” card for use during face-to-face parent interactions. During our all-staff meeting materials will be distributed outlining the procedures for using the services and also for getting help at the school level when needed (asking the LAC for assistance). A demonstration video that outlines the steps for using the over-the-phone services will be played, and the procedure to follow for getting a document 2018-19 CEP 68  translated in-house or by the translation and interpretation services unit, as well as securing a translator in-house will be role played so staff members are clear on what to do. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster is prominently displayed in our main office, along with a copy of the Language ID Guide from the first day of school. A copy of the Language ID Guide will be given to both security desks in the building on or before the first day of school. The LAC will review the use of the guide with main office staff and the security personnel to ensure understanding and proper usage. Copies of the Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access are given out during our first parent-teacher conferences. Additional copies are sent home to families unable to attend the conferences. Both are available in English and Spanish. Copies of the documents with the appropriate home language are sent home to the families. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During our parent-teacher conferences, families have the opportunity to speak on-site with our staff (in English, Spanish, or French) about their experiences with translation and interpretation at our school. Surveys are sent home to gauge family experiences and Mott Hall also has focus groups that allow for families to comment on their experience with various aspects and elements of our school. Translators are available at the focus groups to give families the opportunity to fully share their ideas, feelings, and experiences. 2018-19 CEP 69 
