2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X279 School Name: P.S. 279 CAPTAIN MANUEL RIVERA, JR. Principal: JEAN DALTON ENCKE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 10X279 PS/MS 279 321000010000 K-8 2100 Walton Avenue, Bronx NY 10453 718-584-6004 Phone Number: 718-584-7220 Fax: Jean Dalton Jdalton2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 10 Email Address: Jean Dalton Robert Gallagher Heidi Colon Bibiana Alba Samantha Velez Larsen Leid BrianellyMunoz Helena Yordan District Information MaribelHulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Room 836, Bronx, NY 10458 Superintendent’s Office Address: mhulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: Bronx Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza Bronx, NY 10458, 1230 ZeregaAvenue, Bronx, NY 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 7188286280 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jean Dalton Robert Gallagher Heidi Colon Larsen Leid BrianellyMunoz Helena Yordan Bibiana Alba Joeann Buist ValerianaTejeda *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ashanty Mejia Sylvia Gonzalez Danielle Iannone MairaOzorto Indira Turner YadiraLechuga VerdivaThompson Michele CoyleHughes Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School’s Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview We are a community of learners dedicated to upholding high expectations by providing consistent quality instruction and by taking personal responsibility for creating independent thinkers and tomorrow’s leaders. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Context: PS/MS 279 is an elementary and middle school with 1090 students from kindergarten through 8th grade. The school population is comprised 80% Hispanic, 16% Black, 3% Asian and 1% other. The student body includes 30% English Language Learners and 23% Special Education students. Boys account for 53% of the students enrolled and girls account for 47%. The average attendance rate is 92% and 28% of our students reside in temporary housing. At PS/MS 279 we believe that students learn best when given the opportunities to engage in meaningful and effective tasks, while providing them the opportunities to have their individual needs met in a safe and supportive environment. We believe that learning is three fold - exposure to standards based curriculum, interventions in place to address deficiencies and, when ready, an opportunity for enrichment. It is our expectation that small group instruction is occurring daily and that groups are formed using school-wide data sources. School schedules and individual program cards have been designed to ensure that small group instruction is occurring and resources have been purchased to support teachers in effective implementation of small group work. All classrooms have a set of laptops that can be used during small group instruction. Software programs such as Lexia, Myon, I-ready and Big Brainz have been purchased and professional development has been given to support teachers and students. Common planning periods and Professional Learning Communities have been organized around looking at student work, identifying patterns and trends, setting next instructional steps and then developing the tools necessary for teachers to effectively implement those next instructional steps. We also believe that in order for students to be successful they must feel safe and supported and be part of the overall process. At PS/MS 279 we have worked hard to create a familial and collaborative culture where both students and teachers have opportunities to work together and support one another. In classrooms, class charters are evident, partnerships established and students are often serving as resources for one another. Outside of the classroom, students have multiple opportunities to develop themselves as individuals through service projects and individualized programs, all to help students social and emotional well being. Teachers also serve as resources to one another through planning periods, inter-visitations and informal gatherings to share best practices. We believe that no instruction is sound unless it is derived from data, therefore at PS/MS 279 we have established an assessment structure that allows us to monitor the progress and performance of our students throughout the year. In the beginning of the school year all students take the I-Ready assessment in ELA and Math to provide a baseline for students. ELA teachers also administer running records to ensure that all students are matched correctly to text. Teachers have worked with school based coaches to create unit assessments that are aligned to the standards and tracked on our school based data tracker. After each unit assessment, data is analyzed and revisions made, if necessary, to upcoming units. I-Ready Assessments are also used as a Midline and Endline assessments and students utilize I-ready in small group rotations. The I-ready system is monitored by teachers and is used to address students individual needs. Daily assessments are evident in the use of exit slips, conference notes and checklists. At PS/MS 279 we believe that data must be transparent, therefore students take an active role in their own data through the use of checklists, rubrics, learning progressions and self/peer assessments. The impact of this work is that every year we continue to build and strengthen our instructional core. We continue to work with teachers, building their content and pedagogical knowledge, while providing the time, materials and resources to do so. We leverage our school resources to ensure that all students and staff have access to both instructional and social supports so that they feel valued..At PS/MS 279 we believe that students will be successful when they are provided with quality and rigorous curricula, implemented by teachers whose instruction is grounded in real time data Our school knows that in order for students to be academically successful, they need to be socially and emotionally sound as well. At PS/MS 279 we do a variety of programs to support the “whole” child, below are just a few: 2018-19 CEP 10   Coca Cola Valued Youth Program – a program designed to take our most at-risk students and provide them with the skills and leanings to become tutors to our early childhood students. This program is designed to empower our most at-risk students to become college and career ready.  Community Service – a program designed to empower students to feel a “part of something.”  G.R.A.C.E./ B.R.A.C.E – a girls and boys after school club designed to empower young students to make  healthy choices and give back to their communities. Sports Program – our school provides multiple sports venues for students to showcase their talents and build their self- esteem – Rugby, Basketball, Baseball, Soccer. Partnerships PS/MS 279 believes that it truly does take a village to raise a child and therefore we work collaboratively with the following partners: Morris Heights Health Clinic Riverdale Country School Committee for Hispanic Children and Families Institute for Developmental Research Association (I.D.R.A) Based on our Framework for Great Schools Report, an area that needs improvement is Rigorous Instruction. That being said, our focus this year is to ensure that all students are cognitively engaged in rigorous instruction through small group work that is grounded in data to meet the needs of all learners. We are also going to continue focusing on literacy in all content areas-all teachers will be expected to be reading and writing teachers so that all students become proficient in literacy and to be able to transfer those skills across all content areas. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Although our school makes progress with students, we are still only at 19% proficiency in ELA. Therefore, literacy is our school-wide focus. All teachers are considered literacy teachers and are trained accordingly. Our Special Education students and ELLs did not make as make as much gains as expected. The data indicates that we need to work on writing to ensure our students are successful. This year we have contracted with professional development providers(CITE) to work specifically with teachers of these subgroups to ensure students needs are being met and monitored for progress. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school exceeded the targets for Effective Leadership and Strong Family Ties. We would continue to focus on Collaborative Teachers to plan for Rigorous Instruction to increase students achievement. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X279 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1092 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 98 97 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 21 45 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 93.0% % Reduced Lunch 29.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 78.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.08 1% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 72% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 160 160 5 93.6% 1.0% 19.7% 16.1% 3.8% 0.7% 6 4% 6.5 25.8% 58% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Principal Performance Observation (PPO) 2017-2018 QR components Rated Highly Effective or Effective: 1.2, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.2, 3.1,3.4, 4.1, 4.2, and 5.1. Area of Focus: 1.1: Although we had well developed features in 1.1 a and c we are missing how our curriculum is modified for ENL and SPED. Lesson plans were not coherent across grades and subjects in regards to the scaffolds put in place for ENL and SPED Next Steps:  Revise current units of study to reflect the modifications and scaffolds put in place for ELLs and SPED  Analyze the use of collaborative inquiry protocol for looking at student work at the team level(s)  Ensure that inquiry and teacher teams across content have a clear understanding of checks for understanding and assessment choices for looking at student work.  Review how teachers are tracking progress and modifying lessons based on the current systems you have in place (exit tickets, data trackers and walkthroughs).  Develop common assessment strategies across grades and subjects.  Provide opportunities for all teachers to study research based strategies and approaches in 6-8 week cycles so they support their colleagues with making on-demand instructional decisions for all students to be able to demonstrate progress and mast  NYSESLAT 2018-19 CEP 13  ELLs – 31% Long Term ELLs -50 students ( grades 5-8) SIFE –18 students ELLs who scored Level 2 – 38 students Student at Risk – 43% 50 students tested out from NYSESLAT while 60 % of the students made progress. 88 students = 52% of the total ELLs made progress Simulation Data: In spring of 2017 347 students took the simulation assessment. in Listening, Reading and Writing. As we disaggregated the data we learned that over all our students were experiencing in the area of reading and writing. Approximately 80% of the students continued to struggle with writing 67% struggled in reading. Although the data indicates improvement in both reading and writing, it continues to be our area of need. Upon triangulating the ELA data, NYSESLAT, Simulation a TC Running Record Data At the end of the 2016-2017 school year students in bilingual classes: 55% of Ell students are below grade reading level 28% of Ell students are approaching grade reading level 17% of Ell students are at grade or above grade reading level Based on our data our focus continues to be in the area of reading and writing. Furthermore after triangulating the data, we can safely deduce that even though 45% our students are reading at or above grade level ( TC Running Record) students are reading at or below 55 words per minutes hindering comprehension of the text. Students are decoding the text however they struggle with fluency ultimately leading to be low in comprehension. Currently 128 of our ELLs are at the Expanding level of proficiency but lack comprehension. Our priority: To ensure that teachers focus on small group instruction targeting specific needs of the students in their classrooms. Teachers of English Language Learners in their teacher teams (Grade and Content) meet weekly to analyze student work and assessment data (using a inquiry protocol) and to ensure that this analysis is used to support instructional decision making. Additionally teachers need to use build oral language and increase reading fluency by continuously 2018-19 CEP 14  monitoring oral reading progress towards the benchmark. Oral reading rate is a measure of not only word recognition automaticity (the ability to recognize words automatically) but is an indicator of reading volume and a predictor of comprehension. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 1: By June 2019 there will be a 10% increase in the number of students reading on grade level as evidenced by Running Records, I-Ready data and TC reading progressions. 2018-19 CEP 15 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leaders, Content Coaches, TCRWP Instructional Leaders, Content Coaches, TCRWP Consultant(s), grade team leaders(s), grade team leaders Instructional Leaders, Content Coaches, TCRWP Consultant(s), grade team leaders Instructional Leaders, Content Coaches, TCRWP Consultant(s), grade team leaders Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teacher(s)/teacher teams will utilize TC Running records consistently throughout the year as a reading assessment to show reading progress and performance aligned to grade level standards  Instructional leaders support teachers in utilizing data to group students and identify appropriate scaffolds to support student engagement. Teacher(s)/teacher teams will utilize small group instructional data to provide ongoing feedback to prepare students for the next level of learning. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 All Teachers September 2018-June 2019  Analysis of student data (CCLS aligned in-school assessments, Running Records, Performance Series, and CCLS standardized assessments, NYSESLAT, simulation data ), to identify gaps in student achievement and implement strategies to close gaps in achievement.  Teacher meetings with Instructional Leaders/Content Coaches/TCRWP Consultants to review class data, revise learning goals and implement specific strategies. For example targeting Level 1 and Level 2 students to practice strategies for fluent reading.  Teacher teams review rubrics, checklists, etc. for content and CCLS alignment, as well as Bilingual/ Language progressions, and implement them to support student self-assessment 2018-19 CEP 16  Providing parents with online/at home resources to meet student's specific learning needs. Training will be provided to both parents and students throughout the year. Teachers will meet with instructional coach and consultants to develop lessons and unit plans that build in scaffolds and modifications for ELLs and SPED Professional Learning Cycles for teachers will be instituted to support them in building tool kits to support students individual/group needs All Parents All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leaders, Content Coaches, TCRWP Consultants Coaches, teachers and consultants September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers, Administrators, coaches and parent coordinator will be responsible for coordinating and providing with parents with resources to meet specific needs of the students. Open Family Forum  Curriculum Nights  Open Family Forum  Tuesday Parent Engagement time  Parent Training on curricular Resources to support student learning.  Class Celebrations Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher team/common planning time.  TCRWP/Generation Ready Consultants and Instructional coaches to support Professional Development and in-class support/modeling (K-2, 3-5 and 6-8). Instructional programs to support small group work - I-Ready, Lexia, MyOn etc.   Professional Development/Classroom coaching ( 45 Days) to support pedagogy and content knowledge in literacy  Per session funding to support additional team planning  Per diem funding to cover teachers for PD and for inter-visitations. 2018-19 CEP 17   Teacher and administrative per session to provide an after school program for students at ris Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019 Benchmarks : Lesson plans indicating groupings, differentiation indicating multiple points of entry.  5% increase in number of students moving towards grade level performance   Monthly meetings with administration and coaches to review assessment data.   Student data is used to inform student grouping i.e. in lesson plans, reading groups, etc. Increase the number of students involved in classroom discourse Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Classroom observation Teachers College Running Record tracking Sheet School wide Literacy Tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Quality Review 2017-2018 Principal Performance Observation (PPO) 2017-2018 QR components Rated Highly Effective or Effective: 1.2, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.2, 3.1,3.4, 4.1, 4.2, and 5.1. Area of Focus: 1.1: Although we had well developed features in 1.1 a and c we are missing how our curriculum is modified for ENL and SPED. Lesson plans were not coherent across grades and subjects in regards to the scaffolds put in place for ENL and SPED Next Steps:  Revise current units of study to reflect the modifications and scaffolds put in place for ELLs and SPED  Analyze the use of collaborative inquiry protocol for looking at student work at the team level(s)  Ensure that inquiry and teacher teams across content have a clear understanding of checks for understanding and assessment choices for looking at student work.  Review how teachers are tracking progress and modifying lessons based on the current systems you have in place (exit tickets, data trackers and walkthroughs).  Develop common assessment strategies across grades and subjects.  Provide opportunities for all teachers to study research based strategies and approaches in 6-8 week cycles so they support their colleagues with making on-demand instructional decisions for all students to be able to demonstrate progress and mast Learning Environment Survey: Our School Survey: 2017-2018 58% parents took the survey 100% teachers took the survey 99% students took the survey 2018-19 CEP 19  Our data indicates of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers support them when they are upset. (Q3e) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 2: By June 2019, teachers and students will engage in increased conversations around student behavior leading to an increase in students feeling supported, as evidenced by a 10% increase on the NYC School Survey Measures of classroom behavior from 71% to 81% positive responses 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Expectations are set regarding social emotional learning on the various levels within school community - administrators, teachers, student, school aides, paraprofessional and custodial  Training for all staff on RULER- mood meter, charter to be done in phases throughout the school year.  Creation of school charter with all staff to set classroom and community expectations  Creation of classroom charter to build coherence and consistency of expectations across school building  PLCs designed to support global social emotional learning with support from various resources to assist teachers in meeting students needs (NED, LCI, 4Rs, RULER, Responsive Classroom, LSCI, Mind-Up)  Ongoing training and support for all staff in regards to the Mood Meter and Meta Moment  Daily morning meetings to help students become aware of their emotions  Tea & Talk Sessions for parents to support them in their own emotional and social well- being so they can better support their children  Families are invited to meet with their teachers on Tuesdays as part of Parent Engagement Component. Parents are invited to all Parent Teacher conferences, Publishing Parties and other school events to share student accomplishments Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leaders, grade team leaders, instructional coaches. Parents September 2018-June 2019 Team leaders, instructional coaches. ● Select students from of our Middle School are part of the Most Valued Youth program. This program instills in them the values and life skills necessary for them to be successful in life. Students in this program receive training in how to become leaders and Middle School Students and parents September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leaders, classroom teachers, grade team leaders, Coca 2018-19 CEP 21 All parents and staff September 2018-June 2019 Cola Valued program consultants Instructional Leaders, grade team leaders, instructional coaches help others using the skills they do have. MVTs tutor younger students during the school day and in after school. ●The school has established a core Crisis Team that includes members of school community such as teachers, guidance counselors, coaches and other personnel that meet regularly to discuss strategies to improve classroom behavior and incorporate social/emotional learning current classroom practices. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Open Family Forum  Curriculum Nights  Tuesday Parent Engagement time  Parent Training on curricular Resources to support student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Written and Oral Communication about school events to appropriate members of school community. ● Schedule time for monthly Crisis Team meeting and other meetings such as Safety Meeting, SLT ● Utilize Tuesday Parent Time to articulate school-wide goals and expectation. ● Funding for parent outreach to support improved outcomes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  A 5% increase in Parents attending Tea and Talk.  Increased attendance at the school based professional development sessions for parents on academic and or social/emotional related issues.  An additional cohort for Padres Comprometidos - a 10 week parent university supporting parents to become more involved in their child's schooling. 2018-19 CEP 22   Monthly open forum for parents to provide academic support as well as address any questions or concerns.  An increase in the numbers of parents attending Tuesday Teacher's Time. A digitized version of sign in sheets will be maintained and disaggregated to monitor continuous improvement in family engagement and involvement. An increase in the numbers of parents attending Tuesday Teachers Time. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Increase attendance at the school based professional development session for parents on academic and or social/emotional related issues.  Increase attendance at the school based professional development sessions for parents on academic and or social/emotional related issues. Increase in the number of parents attending Parent Teacher Conferences and Curriculum Night Increase in the number of parents attending Padres Comprometidos Increase in the number of parents attending Tuesday Professional Development with teachers.     Observations of classroom morning meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. NYCDOE ADVANCE 2017-2018 DOMAIN 3: Instruction ALL: Highly Effective: 12%, Effective 84%, Developing 4%, Ineffective 0% 3b: Using questioning and discussion: Effective 89%, Developing 11%, Ineffective 0% 3c: Engaging students in learning: Highly Effective: 5%, Effective 84%, Developing 11%, Ineffective 0% 3d: Using assessment in instruction: Highly Effective: 4%, Effective 83%, Developing 13%, Ineffective 0% Principal Performance Observation (PPO) 2017-2018 QR components Rated Highly Effective or Effective: 1.2, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.2, 3.1,3.4, 4.1, 4.2, and 5.1. Area of Focus: 1.1: Although we had well developed features in 1.1 a and c we are missing how our curriculum is modified for ENL and SPED. Lesson plans were not coherent across grades and subjects in regards to the scaffolds put in place for ENL and SPED Next Steps:  Revise current units of study to reflect the modifications and scaffolds put in place for ELLs and SPED  Analyze the use of collaborative inquiry protocol for looking at student work at the team level(s)  Ensure that inquiry and teacher teams across content have a clear understanding of checks for understanding and assessment choices for looking at student work.  Review how teachers are tracking progress and modifying lessons based on the current systems you have in place (exit tickets, data trackers and walkthroughs).  Develop common assessment strategies across grades and subjects. 2018-19 CEP 24  Provide opportunities for all teachers to study research based strategies and approaches in 6-8 week cycles so they support their colleagues with making on-demand instructional decisions for all students to be able to demonstrate progress and mast Priority Need:  Our priority need is to ensure that teacher teams (Grade and Content) meet weekly to analyze student work and assessment data (using a inquiry protocol) and to ensure that this analysis us used to support instructional decision making. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 3: Content area teams will work to develop a shared understanding of LASW protocol(s) and will be able to identify instructional strengths and weaknesses in student learning to collaboratively determine instructional shifts for small group instruction that will address students’ learning needs and monitor their effectiveness, as exemplified by a 5% increase in student performance on the NYS ELA and Math exam in June 2019 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will research and select a collaborative inquiry protocol for looking at student work. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leaders and Grade Team Leaders  Instructional leaders support teachers in utilizing data to group students and identify appropriate scaffolds to support student engagement. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leaders and Grade Team Leaders  Teacher(s)/teacher teams will utilize small group instructional data to provide ongoing feedback to prepare students for the next level of learning  Analysis of student data (CCLS aligned in-school assessments, Running Records, Performance Series, and CCLS standardized assessments, NYSESLAT, simulation data ), to identify gaps in student achievement and implement strategies to close gaps in achievement.  Teachers will meet with instructional coach and consultants to develop lessons and unit plans that build in scaffolds and modifications for ELLs and SPED  Professional Learning Cycles for teachers will be instituted to support them in building tool kits to support students individual/group needs  Teachers in grade level meetings will share student work from their own classes and share best practices o Teachers will work with coaches to reflect on their instruction and identify adjustments in planning to support students’ need and to provide all student to demonstrate mastery.  Teacher teams will ensure that instructional needs are addressed by assessments and in planning and appropriately scaffolded to meet the needs of SWDs, ENLs and struggling students through differentiated tasks, student groupings, etc. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leaders and Grade Team Leaders 2018-19 CEP 26 Teachers will build on reflections of LASW to identify students’ instructional strengths and weaknesses, All Teachers September 2018-2019 Instructional Leaders and Grade Team Leaders. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Open Family Forum  Curriculum Nights  Tuesday Parent Engagement time  Parent Training on curricular Resources to support student learning.(I-Ready, Lexia, EnGrade, etc.)   Three project based celebrations to include families to be invited into the school to celebrate student work  Conduct collaborative PTA and Parent Coordinator workshops on identified topics such as: homework help, Introduce Class Parents to support student learning structure of technology use at home, project based learning and family involvement, College and Career readiness and what that means for parents and students Teachers, Administrators, coaches and parent coordinator will be responsible for coordinating and providing with parents with resources to meet specific needs of the students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Master schedule to provide for weekly common planning period.  Monday PLC Cycles  ELA and Math Calendar Days  Additional Half Days for Teacher Professional Development  Coach/consultant to provide on-going professional development  Per Session to support additional team planning/PD Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019  Using a research-based LASW protocol, teacher teams will examine student work identifying students’ strengths and weaknesses.  Teacher teams will reflect on student strengths and weaknesses to review, revise and/or appropriately scaffold instruction and tasks to provide all students i.e. SWDs, ENLs, struggling students, etc. opportunities to demonstrate mastery .  Utilize I-ready computer based assessment to determine student progress towards benchmark. 2018-19 CEP 27   Analyze school wide data tracker to formulate small group instruction and monitor student progress towards performance Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Scaffolded tasks will be developed for each piece of student work reviewed using the LASW protocol. Revised tasks will be administered to students not demonstrating mastery on the initial task. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ALL: Highly Effective: 11%, Effective 78%, Developing 11%, Ineffective 0% 3b: Using questioning and discussion: Highly Effective: 5%, Effective 84%, Developing 11%, Ineffective 0% 3c: Engaging students in learning: Highly Effective: 15%, Effective 73%, Developing 12%, Ineffective 0% 3d: Using assessment in instruction: Highly Effective: 11%, Effective 77%, Developing 11%, Ineffective 0% School Learning Environment Survey: Principal Performance Observation (PPO) 2017-2018 QR components Rated Highly Effective or Effective: 1.2, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.2, 3.1, 4.1, 4.2, and 5.1. Area of Focus: 2.2: Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. Quality Review 2017-2018 Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 29  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 4: By June 2019, SWD and ELLs students in grades K-8 will show a year to a year and a half years growth as measured by Lexia literacy based program. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Training for all ELL and SPED teachers on LEXIA  Analysis of ELA data tracker to monitor student progress  and performance Lesson plan clinics to help teachers prepare lessons that actively engage students in the learning and enable them to differentiate for all learners (SPED, ELL and advanced  Generation Ready ( QTEL certified) consultant will support teachers in utilizing data to group students and identify appropriate scaffolds to support student engagement.  Coaching cycles provided by Generation Ready consultant to support teachers in implementing scaffolds and supports as necessary  Consultant will collaborate with teachers in modifying units of studies to incorporate Language Supports for English Language Learners.  Providing parents with online/at home resources to meet student's specific learning needs. Training will be provided to both parents and students throughout the year. Scheduling of daily small group instruction to ensure LEXIA is being implemented with fidelity  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Sep. 2018- June 2019 Administrators Instructional Support Coaches Teachers  teachers to monitor student data to ensure all students are progressing academically All Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators Instructional Support Coaches 2018-19 CEP 31  Inter/Intra visitations to share best practices specific to assessment practices and use of data to drive instruction. ● Professional development training to entire staff and families to meet high expectations and ensure students are on a path to college and career readiness  Monthly open forums to provide academic updates to parents and answer any questions or concerns. All Teachers All Families Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators Instructional Support Coaches Teachers All Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators Instructional Support Coaches Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Open Family Forums  Curriculum Nights  Tuesday Parent Engagement time  Parent Training on curricular Resources to support student learning and understanding assessment practices  Report Cards and Parent Teacher conferences to discuss student progress  Parent access to Engrade to share assessment data in all content areas Teachers, Administrators, coaches and parent coordinator will be responsible for coordinating and providing parents with resources to meet specific needs of the students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ●Purchase of Lexia Software ● Laptops for all classrooms to be used in small group instruction to meet LEXIA requirements ● School schedule with common planning times built in for small group instructiont ● Per Session funding for additional planning and coaching support ● Per diem funding for substitute teachers to free up teachers for additional planning and inter-intra visitations Teacher Professional Development/Advance Binders 2018-19 CEP 32  ● Coach schedules 20 days of Generation Ready consultancy to support SPED and ELL teachers in their content and pedagogical skills. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019 Benchmark  Growth of grades on school data trackers to ensure students are making progress.  Analysis of LEXIA data to ensure students are making progress and performance  Monthly check in on data meetings with coaches to ensure students on making progress in the aforementioned assessments  Weekly coach meetings to address needs of teachers based on observational data  Monthly professional development calendar to address the needs of all teachers  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. LEXIA , Data Tracker and MOTP summary tracker will be utilized to review mid year progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Overall Data: Learning Environment Survey 58% parents took the survey 100% teachers took the survey 99% students took the survey Overall Data: 94% of students attending PS/MS 279 were eligible to receive free or reduced price lunch in the 2014-2015 school year The average attendance rate was 92%. The chronic absenteeism rate is 30%. 28% of students attending PS/MS 279 live in temporary housing. School Survey Data: Quality Review 2014-2015 Data: 3.4: Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provides supports to achieve those expectations (Proficient) Findings: School leaders consistently communicate and provide training to the entire staff to meet high expectations and provide families with information about how the school’s expectations for students are connected to a path of college and career readiness. Impact: In providing training to the staff, school leaders promote a system of accountability within the school that enables teachers and themselves to offer ongoing feedback to help families understand student progress toward those expectations. 2018-19 CEP 34  Our data indicates that while parents report positive interactions with their child’s teacher and school leadership, more opportunities for parents to engage in the school community are needed to involve a greater number of parents in the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 5: During 2018-2019 school year, parents will indicate an increase in teacher/parent communication about their child's progress and performance as evidenced by growth on the Strong Family-Community Ties survey score from 3.83 to 3.95 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leaders Parent Coordinator Family Workers Classroom Teachers All families September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leaders  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Four scheduled Parent-Teacher sessions will be widely promoted to maximize participation by parents at families. During the September Parent Engagement night, families will have the opportunity to meet with their child’s teacher(s), learn about the curriculum and special programs offered and visit their child’s classroom. Parent-Teacher conferences will take place from the afternoon until 8:00 pm. At these conferences, report cards will be distributed with time for families to meet with their child’s teacher(s) to discuss their progress. For the May Parent Engagement night, families will come to school with their child to celebrate the work students have completed throughout the school year. ● The use of contractually mandated parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons has been utilized in many different ways to increase communication with parents and to bring parents into the school building to take part in different activities with school staff. In addition to making parent phone calls and setting up individual parent meetings during this time, teachers will also create newsletters to highlight important upcoming information and events to families. Additionally, parents are invited to take part in workshops on how to create accounts and use Engrade the school-wide grading website, how to help their children become more successful readers, and to participate in sports and fitness activities ● Guidance counselors and family workers conduct workshops on the middle school and high school application process for fifth and eighth grade families. In addition to covering the general application process, workshops will also be held on admission to specialized and audition high schools and on special considerations for the high school application process for students with disabilities and English language learners Classroom Teachers Family Workers Parent Coordinator Instructional Leaders Guidance Counselors Family Workers CHCF Staff Families of 5th and 8th graders September 2018-June 2019 In collaboration with the Committee for Hispanic Children and Families program, parents are invited to take part in the “Padres Compremetidos” program, a ten week parent university program to help parents become more involved in Students,Parents and families September 2018- June 2019 2018-19 CEP 36  the school community and to help parents prepare their children for college and careers. Two ten week cycles of the program will be offered. ● Students and their families will be offered the opportunity to take part in the CHISPA (Children Investigating Science with Parents After School) program. In partnership with CHCF staff, CHISPA will run in eight week cycles after school to increase engagement in science. ● In collaboration with the Committee for Hispanic Children and Families program, parents are invited to take part in the “Padres Compremetidos” program, a ten week parent university program to help parents become more involved in the school community and to help parents prepare their children for college and careers. Two ten week cycles of the program will be offered. ● Students and their families will be offered the opportunity to take part in the CHISPA (Children Investigating Science with Parents After School) program. In partnership with CHCF staff, CHISPA will run in eight week cycles after school to increase engagement in science. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  Power My Learning - Family Engagement Forum  CHCF - Community for Hispanic Children a Community Based organization collaborates with the school in organizing family events such as “Padres Compremetidos” program, a ten week parent university program to help parents become more involved in the school community.  Open Family Forum  Curriculum Nights  Tuesday Parent Engagement time  Parent Training on curricular Resources to support student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Monthly school-wide calendar of events and newsletters sent home with students ● Parent Conferences and parent engagement events advertised with fliers, phone calls, and emails 2018-19 CEP 37  ● Scheduling parent conferences in both the afternoon and evening to allow more parents to attend ● Funding to allow 8th grade students to have breakfast at the school and travel with family members and staff members to the Bronx High School Fair in October. ● Scheduled time to allow for collaboration between school staff and CHCF staff on various programs and opportunities available to students and families Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019 Benchmarks:  All members attend SLT Meetings, evidenced by minutes  5% increase in attendance at monthly PTA meetings, evidenced by attendance sheets  6% increase in attendance at Parent Engagement functions, based on sign in sheet  An additional cohort for Padres Comprometidos - a 10 week parent university supporting parents to become more involved in their child's schooling. Monthly open forum for parents to provide academic support as well as address any questions or concerns. An increase in the numbers of parents attending Tuesday Teachers Time. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Participation in SLT meetings, Community and school wide events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Guided Reading Small Group One to one Small Group Strategy Groups and Fundations, Word Study, Word Generation, Lexia. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day After school Small group intervention & fluency Small Group One to one During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) K-2 TC Running Records, TC Foundational Assessment and Benchmark, Fundations Unit Assessments, Baselines 3-8 TC Running Records, DRP, P Series, iReady, Baselines, NYSELA Test 3 - 8 NYS Assessment K - 8 Math Data Trackers 3 - 8 Performance Series 3 - 8 i-Ready Diagnostics Performance Series Word Study Small Group TC Running Records Academic Vocabulary One to one Social Studies Performance Series Word Study Small Group TC Running Records Academic Vocabulary One to one Child Study Meetings Role Play Small group At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, During the school day During the school day During the school day 2018-19 CEP 39 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Parent request Conflict resolution One on One 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 323 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. - After school academic intervention for students in STH in literacy and math - Social Emotional Training for all students in RULER and Mindfulness -All students in STH will be provided uniforms and backpacks with school supplies - On-going workshops for parents provided by CHCF to support them at home and in school -Parent training on SEL and Padres Comprometidos - Parent/Student field trips with CHCF(Committee for Hispanic Children and Families) - Counseling support through school based counselors and Morris Heights Academic Intervention and Social/Emotional Learning Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 41   After school academic intervention for students in STH in literacy and math  Workshops run by CHCF for all families living in STH   All students in STH will be provided uniforms and backpacks with school supplies Social Emotional Training for all students in RULER and Mindfulness 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Building capacity by empowering teacher leaders to act as mentors to support and instruct new teachers. and offering Model teacher positions to share best practices and empower teacher leaders ● Creating grade level leaders to facilitate common planning periods and act as lab sites when necessary. ● Hiring of a full time math and literacy coach to support teachers with content and pedagogical skills ● Creating a hiring committee comprised of teachers, AP’s and principal to recruit and retain highly qualified teachers ● Partnering with Teacher’s College consultants and Generation Ready consultants to recruit and retain HQ teachers. ● Creating lead teacher positions to support literacy and math instruction for all students ● The hiring of a Generation Ready consultant to support ELL instruction ● The purchase of web-based reading improvement programs i.e., I-Ready, Lexia, MyOn to support teachers in small group instruction. ● The purchase of classroom safes and laptops to support small group instruction in ELA and Math . ● Participation in Teacher’s College Professional Development workshops to enhance teacher content and pedagogy.  Partnership with New teacher Center to provide all new teachers with 2 years ofmentoring support Partnership with Universities to recruit teachers in their content field Devoting a full-time position to a teacher mentor to support new teachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 CEP 43  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Teachers College Reading and Writing Consultants provide regular professional development to teachers through planning sessions and lab sites. Teachers attend professional development at Teachers college and then turnkey to their colleagues. ● MSQI Coach provides professional development to teachers through workshops, modeling, coaching and planning sessions ● Reading Apprenticeship Coach provides professional development to teachers through workshops, modeling, coaching and planning sessions ● School-based Literacy and Math Coach provide on-going training on best practices, grounded in Danielson, through modeling, coaching, workshops and lab site. ● Paraprofessional Study Group led by Reading specialists to ensure that our paraprofessionals are receiving training in literacy interventions to best support students’ needs ● The scheduling of 5 additional half days for common core training ● Weekly common planning periods on all grades for planning and sharing best practices Inter-visitations among teachers to share best practic Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 2018-19 CEP 44  ● Collaborate with feeder schools to set expectations for pre-school stability ● Set up tours of our school for the neighboring pre-schools ● Two orientation meetings - June and September ● Open house provided by the PTA to answer questions and alleviate concerns ● Workshops from the Guidance Counselor for parents to help in the transition from Pre-K to Kindergarten 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Grade teams with the Instructional coaches collaborate to ● Review running records on a monthly basis to monitor progress ● Review math data trackers after each unit of study to ensure mastery and inform next teaching points ● Devise CCLS aligned rubrics, checklists and other criteria for assessing student work & providing actionable feedback ● Conduct Professional learning Communities around Danielson 3c ● Examine the item analysis resulting from the 4 Simulation Tests in ELA and also in Mathematics ● Develop suitable strategies to address gaps in student understanding as revealed in the Simulation data 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 975,217.00 131,469.00 2018-19 CEP 45 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a,5b,5d, 5e 5a,5b, 5d,5e X n/a X 5a,5b,, 5c,5d, 5e n/a 5a,5b,5c, 5d, 5e Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 37,996.00 n/a 6,199,410.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP 46  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/MS 279, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/MS 279 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS 279 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 50  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 51  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 52  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: assessments Our Title lll Program will be in cycles of two (ten weeks) each and will run from October 2-December 19 and January 8- February 27 to provide the students with multiple opportunities for growth in both languages, English and Spanish. The purpose of providing support in both languages is to make students proficient in English so they are able to transition. The program will be tailored to meet the needs of students who require additional assistance in language development, reading skills as well as meeting their grade-level academic standards. We use NYSESLAT data analysis in listening, speaking, reading and writing, NYS ELA assessments as well IReady Diagnostic as well as individual data from Lexia ( researched based program) assessments to determine the skills and strategies needed for learning a particular modality of the Language Arts/ NYSESLAT after school after school Currently we have 333 of ELLs enrolled in our school. Based on our data, students currently invited to our Title III after school programs are students that have been classified as Long Term ELLs and SIFE. Our goals is to serve 75% of our ELLs. We will be serving 175 students who will be taught by certified Bilingual Teachers; 8 teachers during the after school program and 4 teachers on Saturdays. Approximately 120 will be served during the week and the remaining 80 students will be served on Saturdays. Our current ELL population includes Entering: 50 students Emerging: 40 student Transitioning: 90 students Expanding: 128 students New comers: 75 students SIFE: 42 Our Title III program will be in session from 2:30 PM to 4:00 PM Wednesday and Thursday, and 9:00-12:00 on Saturdays. During after school, direct instruction will be provided in literacy and math. The math block will focus on developing students skills in mathematics based on CCLS. Teachers will use resources from Common Core Library as well use "Math Focus" to supplement and scaffold instructions for students in the program. The literacy block will focus on reading of fiction and non- fiction text as well as engage students in on-demand and reflective writing. Moreover, the program will focus on developing phonics using phonics-based program from Lexia, a researched based program to improve comprehension. ELLs enrolled in the Title III program will be provided with a scaffolded curriculum with built in language support based on Language Progressions to meet their language needs in the areas of speaking, reading, writing and listening. ELLs will be identified for learning needs per their years of service and will be provided a tailored curriculum to meet such needs. ELLs who are within years 0 and 2 who's proficiency levels are Entering and Emerging will be provided intervention services in the form of recognizing letter-sound relationships in an effort to improve their word recognition 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and reading fluency. Teachers will use materials from Language Power as well as Guided Reading to increase their reading skills and comprehension. Teachers will use Lexia (both online and paper) component of the program to teach foundational skills. Our goal is that through Guided Reading, Shared Reading, Read Aloud and Fundation/Wilson students will be introduced to new academic vocabulary as well as develop oral language. ELLs in years 3 and beyond who's proficiency levels are Transitioning and Expanding, will be provided with direct instruction in comprehension strategies to help monitor their reading and improve reading comprehension. Writing will also be addressed and students will be provided with scaffolded intervention strategies such a formulaic writing stems, sentence starters and progressing to using graphic organizers with minimal assistance to improve their writing. Additionally, teachers will use data from TCRWP writing progression to determine individual needs of the students. Our Saturday program will commence on Jan 9 and continue through March 16. Direct Instruction will be provided in literacy. The literacy block will focus on reading of fiction and non- fiction text as well as engage students in on-demand and reflective writing. Moreover, the program will focus on developing phonics using phonics-based program from Scholastic System 44 as well as Lexia, a researched based program to improve comprehension. The four teachers in Saturday Academy will work in an Integrated Model i.e an ENL teacher will work with the Social Studies certified teacher and an ENL teacher will work with content area teacher to provide direct linguistic and content support to those students. Our Saturday program will include the 42 SIFE students enrolled in our school. Their proficiency levels range from Entering and Emerging. We will be working through the following steps: to identify areas of strength and need, place the student based on those strengths and weaknesses, employ additional intervention services and ongoing assessment to monitor progress. For this school year 2018-19 we intend to use Literacy Evaluation for Newcomer SIFE (MLS). The MLS is a multilingual suite of diagnostics designed to measure the home-language literacy skills SIFE bring with them when they enter New York City schools, specifically to provide educators with a diagnostic that would support the SIFE identification process. The results of the MLS will offer educators detailed descriptions of a student’s skills and abilities in reading, vocabulary, and math. The MLS will also test phonics, single word reading, and sentence reading. This tool will be highly informative for teachers of SIFE, since students come in with a range of skills in both literacy and math, and knowing each individual student’s strengths and weaknesses is essential for teachers to plan instruction. Our SIFE students will be taught using scaffolding techniques to integrate oral and written language into content area instruction, such techniques include using instructional tools such as graphic organizers, visuals and short videos to help students to make sense of content. Project Based Learning, researched based program such as Lexia will be used to support in Language Acquisition. Wherever possible these students will be paired up with a "buddy" in the classroom who has the same home language to serve as a friend. Progress will be constantly monitored and if the intervention does not seem to be working, the teachers will meet to reassess the instructional plan. The teachers will provide 30 minutes of instruction using Estrellita methodologies and strive to enhance their base in the home language. Shortly after their Estrellita intervention, students will continue to develop their skills by using different approaches of reading such as guided reading, independent reading, read aloud, shared reading in the native language. As part of the ENL component, teachers will use Longman Keys to Learning to develop language and concept in the English language. Additionally we have purchased materials from Curriculum Associates (Teacher Created Materials) to support both Native language and English Instruction. Instruction will take place in whole group as well as in centers. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Beginning September 30, 2018 on Tuesdays from 3:35 - 4:35 PM and running weekly through March 2, teachers of ELLs working in Title III program will be part of Professional Learning where they will receive PD around using Lexia the research based program as well as Language Power program, that specifically targets students at their level. Title III teachers will utilize an ENL teaching continuum to guide and reflect on their practices on implementing ENL strategies and embedding language supports with their lessons. Teachers will be trained and supported on how to develop targeted language embedded content objectives to ensure that all students have the necessary language supports to engage in the curriculum in all content areas. Additionally, based on our learning of (RTI for ELLs) professional development around “Looking at Student Work”, planning sessions will be provided to make instructional decisions. As indicated earlier SIFE MLS will be used to assess their academic gaps and training will be provided to teachers to utilize multiple strategies including use of Lexia (researched based programs) along with ENL strategies will be implemented. Administrator, literacy coach and ELL coordinator will be involved in providing training to teachers of ELLs. We will utilize video and SIFE resources provided by NYCDOE along with, Native Language Continuum and English Language Continuum to train and develop teachers. We will revisit and use strategies learned in our study group using the book, Making Assessment Matter: Using Test Results to Differentiate Reading Instruction by PhD Nonie K. Lesaux PhD to better our understanding of providing support for children’s social and emotional health. We will continue to train and use before, during and after reading strategies that were taught to us by Margarita Calderon and Associates using the Exc-ELL platform and its methodologies. Literacy coaches, ENL consultant and teachers will collaborate when planning units of study to ensure that appropriate language supports are included throughout the lesson. They will develop a collaborative online platform to share tools and resources that help support ELLs. A QTEL certified ENL consultant will provide coaching and planning support to designated Title III and general education teachers to model and support their implementation of ENL strategies in their classes and to develop a coherent structure or ELL support across grade levels. Before reading strategies such as developing schema through relevant activities that student can connect with to better their understanding of subsequent literature, previewing vocabulary in meaningful and sustainable ways and through the catering of oral transmission to elicit ideas and thoughts during previewing of texts, will be addressed. In addition, during and after reading strategies that allow for the development of the four modalities of reading, writing, listening and speaking will be presented during the weekly meetings. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We plan to offer Saturday Family program that caters to the learning of English and celebration of cultures. We will invite parents of our current SIFE, LTE and ELLs students to support their Language Acquisition. The program will be offered every Saturday morning beginning March 9-April 27 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. We will hold two classes for parents taught by two teachers of ELLs. Based on our past parent participation we anticipate 60-75 parents to attend our classes. Parents will rotate between two classes; one a traditional classroom experience taught by a teacher using chalkboard and reproducible materials while the other in language in technology laboratory that uses Lexia. Every parent will have his/her own account and our team of pedagogues to gauge their language growth and monitor their progress. As part of Parent Engagement, we are planning to hold monthly workshops beginning December on Tuesdays as part of Parent Engagement to inform parents and support their understanding of the resources offered by the school to help with the English acquisition. Workshops will be provided by our coaches, bilingual/ENL certified teachers to parents in Common Core Learning Standards in ELA and Math, strategies to support their children with reading unfamiliar words, blending, and segmenting as well as social and emotional skills. Parents will be notified and a parent outreach will be done through letters and flyers. These will be translated in appropriate languages and translation will be provided by appropriate school personnel and/or interpretation services. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name The Captain Manuel Rivera Jr. Borough Bronx School Number 279 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jean Dalton Coach Rosa Lofgren ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sarah Schott Teacher/Subject Area Elba Perez Teacher/Subject Area n/a Related-Service Provider Daisy Villalobos Superintendent Maribell Hulla Assistant Principal Shehnaz Hashim Coach Margaret Clarck School Counselor Judith Galarza Parent Heidi Colon Parent Coordinator Samantha Valez Field Support Center Staff Member Olga Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 6 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 3 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 10 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1112 2018-19 CEP 60 Total number of ELLs 333 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 29.95%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1992-1993 K 1 1 1 2 1 3 0 4 1 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 0 5 1 6 0 7 0 8 1 9 10 11 12 Tot # 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S./M.S 279 uses Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Assessments, Running Records, Lexia as well as the optional components of the program to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs. The optional components such as assessment data from sight words, spellings words,letter sound recognition, concepts of print, and word study are used in Kindergarten through Second grade with the aim to assess early literacy skills typically mastered prior to reading . In grades K-8 teachers use individual and group conferences to identify individual students strengths and weakness. Throughout the school year, teachers also use students’ published pieces, comprehension tests in reading, writing checklists,rubrics and learning progressions. Gathering data from different sources provides teachers with a better understanding of students’ needs in order to put in place a more cohesive plan. In K-3 Great Leaps and Fundations- Researched Based program as well as Lexia,a researched based computer program that targets early literacy skills is used to assess students language. In grades 4-8, Just Words , a Phonics and word study program, is used in small groups to assess academic needs. In addition Wilson is used to 2018-19 CEP 61  assess literacy skills in students who are identified as struggling readers through the Just Words assessment. Additionally, in grades 3-8 students reading levels are assessed using Performance Series and iReady, computer based assessments that provides skill analysis for individual students. The data from these assessments are utilized to form small group instruction to further support our English Language Learners. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? How do you analyze your data? The formative assessment data is collected both on a daily basis after each lesson as well as on a weekly basis through comprehension assessments. At PS/MS 279 assessment calendar is in place which indicates the administration and frequency of each assessment given. For example for grade K-2 formal and informal Running Record Assessment is administered 5 times a year whereas for grades 3-8 it is administered 3 times a year. The administration of diagnostic assessments for I Ready and PSeries are calendared for both fall and spring terms to gage gains in individual students. Data collected both formally and informally during Common Planning time; time provided to teachers in their schedule to meet at grade level teams to disaggregate the data and plan for instruction. Teachers regularly meeting during common planning time, during teacher time and during lunch and learns to plan instruction for their students. Teachers in grades K-8 are scheduled to meet with TC consultants in grade level teams and/ or in small groups based on their students needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Students in grades K-8 are administered multiple summative and baseline assessment to measure growth in reading, writing, listening and speaking modalities. In grades K-2 Teachers College Running Record Assessment a tool measure student progress. The baseline assessment is given during the month of Sept/ Oct and endline is administered in May/ June to track student progress. The TC reading benchmarks are utilized to measure if students are making adequate progress. Similarly, in grades 3-8 for ELA and Math Performance Series and IReady assessments are utilized as baseline and at the end of the year to measure progress. Additionally, unit assessments and mini quizzes are given to students to assess progress and inform small group instruction. Our data indicates our students continuously progress towards language proficiency however need extensive word study and vocabulary instruction. In addition, ENL teachers administer a baseline assessment using Lexia and a letter/ sound recognition assessment at the beginning of the year.The school assesses the success of our programs for ELL’s through many different modalities. First, the school staff examines assessment data from sources such as: NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Running Record, Performance Series assessment, yearly city and state assessments, conferencing and informal observations to assess student achievement at benchmark periods in the year. The data collected at the beginning of each year is compared to the data collected at the middle and the end of the year to measure ELL students’ overall academic movement. If the ELL’s have not made progress on the middle of the year assessments, the ENL teachers work with the administration and the classroom teacher to discuss the effectiveness of the current ENL program to make any changes necessary for the ELL students. In addition we administer a NYSESLAT simulation test mid year to further identify areas of weakness within the four modalities: Speaking, Listening, Writing and Reading. With the data from the NYSESLAT simulation test we create a spreadsheet of test scores separated by modality. This allows teachers to identify areas of individual student weakness and also to observe any trends of weaknesses within the ELL population as a whole or by grade. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? How you disaggregate the summative assessment data that ..... RtI process in place. and intervention. If you have 50% of student population how do we target them. Based on our NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data we have observed that students in grades K-3 are approaching proficiency level in language acquisition assessment as they are moving one level to the next. Further aggregation of data reveals that even though the students are moving levels they continue to struggle in the writing component of the NYSESLAT. Examining the 2018-19 CEP 62  results in the four modalities- listening, speaking, reading and writing- of the NYSESLAT we noticed that even though students move to a higher level in all grades, they remain more proficient in listening and speaking in all grades with the exception of the newcomers that generally are entering/emerging and transitioning. In reading and writing modality most of the grades fall in the Expanding level with exception of the kindergarten, first grade and newcomers students that stay in the Emergent or Entering level. Examining the result of the NYSITELL we can notice that there is a higher percent of Kindergarten students who pass the test. The kindergarteners that are new to the country tend to score at a Entering or Emergent level. In first grade, students who were in Kindergarten at P.S/MS 279 tend to increase about one proficiency level from the NYSITELL at the beginning of their Kindergarten year to the NYSESLAT during the spring of their Kindergarten year. There are, of course, a few exceptions where the students’ proficiency level decreases from the NYSITELL to the NYSESLAT. We also noticed that some of our students who had achieved an advanced level score in upper elementary grades fell back to an transitioning level or continued to score at either transitioning or Expanding level. To reverse this trend, our certified ENL teachers are diligently working with both classroom teachers and with students with researched based materials such as " Just Words", " "Wilson" and Fundations. In addition, these students are receiving other AIS services and interventions by experienced ENL and Bilingual teachers as well as our community based programs offered by CHCF. Since the weakness in Reading/Writing is across the grades, the intervention to address these weaknesses will be across the ENL program. In order to address the areas of Reading and Writing in these grades and as per the new regulations, ENL teachers push-into these classrooms during literacy periods. ENL teachers pushing into a classroom during literacy periods are able to scaffold reading and writing assignments to make them more accessible for struggling readers and writers. ENL teachers also work on strategies such as: word attack skills, comprehension skills, grammar skills, and writing mechanics. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The staff at PS/MS 279 looks at the assessment data for our ELLs through a language acquisition lens in order to plan instruction for our ELLs within the RTI framework. The staff looks at data from sources such as the NYSESLAT, the NYSITELL and Spanish LAB, Teachers College Running Record, State Assessments and Performance Tests to form groupings and track progress in both language acquisition and content knowledge. To provide Tier II interventions we have instituted an "ELL Academy" in addition to using research based materials such as Lexia, Language Power and ENL strategies to address the needs of individual students. Additional supports are provided through Title III funds after schools. These sessions are 90 minutes each. During these periods ELL students may be grouped by grade and areas of need to ensure that instruction is meeting them at their level and working to get them to a performance level consistent with grade expectations. One example of such a grouping is in grade six students identified as in need of "Wilson Reading Program" receive this service from trained members of our community and those students who score above the Wilson cut off marks who may still need interventions receive intervention "Just Words" to improve reading and comprehension skills. With the recent distribution of the RTI Guide for Teachers of ELLs, our teachers of ELLs are working to integrate the suggested strategies into their practice. Additionally, students are grouped by proficiency levels to provide targeted support based on their needs. For example in grades 4-6 the ENL teachers group students by proficiency level and provide instructional support based on their needs. Teachers use Lexia an adaptive software program to build early literacy along with I Ready to comprehension skills. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL and RLAT data to inform and evaluate our ELL programs. Our current program is as follows: Literacy For all grades (k-8th) students at a entering/emerging level will have 60% of the literacy instructional time in the native language. By the 2nd or 3rd trimester if the students have shown development in the second language, time allocated for native language will start decreasing, individually, until they get to the mandated required time of forty five minutes of native 2018-19 CEP 63  language instruction and two periods of ENL, daily. For all grades (k-8th) students at an transitioning level will have 50% of the literacy instructional time in the native language. By the 2nd or 3rd trimester if the students have shown development in the second language, time allocated for native language will start decreasing, individually, until they get to the mandated required time of native language instruction- 45 minutes daily, two periods of ENL, daily. For all grades (k-8th) students at an expanding level will have 45 minutes of the literacy instructional time in the native language and mandated required time of native language instruction with mandated instruction time for ENL Content Areas Math For grades (k-2nd) all language level students, the first trimester will have 60% (3 days per week) of the math instructional time in the native language. Mini lessons will be conducted in Spanish with the summary in English (ENL). If the students have shown development in the second language, the time allocated for the native language will be decreased over a period of time. Teachers will be teaching mostly in English (ENL) with the summary in Spanish, if necessary. However, if there is a concept too hard for the students to get, the teacher can revert to Spanish for that specific lesson. For grades (3rd -8th) all language level students, the first trimester will have 40% of the math instructional time in the native language. Mini lessons will be conducted in Spanish with the summary in English (ENL). If the students have shown development in the second language, the time allocated for the native language will be decreased over a period of time. Teachers will be teaching mostly in English (ENL) with the summary in Spanish, if necessary. However, if there is a concept too hard for the students to get, the teacher can revert to Spanish for that specific lesson. Science/Social Studies For grades (k-2nd) all language level students, the first trimester will have 60% of the instructional time in the native language. Mini lessons will be conducted in Spanish with the summary in English (ENL). If the students have shown development in the second language, the time allocated for the native language will be decreased over a period of time. Teachers will be teaching mostly in English (ENL) with the summary in Spanish, if necessary. However, if there is a concept too hard for the students to get, the teacher can revert to Spanish for that specific lesson. For grades (3rd -8th ) all language level students, the first trimester will have 40% of the Science/Social Studies instructional time in the native language. Mini lessons will be conducted in Spanish with the summary in English (ENL). If the students have shown development in the second language, the time allocated for the native language will be decreased over a period of time. Teachers will be teaching mostly in English (ENL) with the summary in Spanish, if necessary. However, if there is a concept too hard for the students to get, the teacher can revert to Spanish for that specific lesson. The instructional time allocated for both languages in the ENL Program is as follow: Literacy For all grades (k-8th) students at a entering/emerging and transitioning level will receive instruction with the use of ENL methodology. By the 2nd or 3rd trimester if the students have shown development in the second language, time allocated for ENL methodology will start decreasing, individually, until they get to the mandated required time of ENL instruction two periods of ENL, daily. For all grades (k-8th) students at an expanding level will receive instruction with the use of ENL methodology and one period of ELA. By the 2nd or 3rd trimester if the students have shown development in the second language, time allocated for ENL methodology will start decreasing, individually, until they get to the mandated required time of ENL instruction, two periods of ENL, daily. Content Areas For all grades (K-8th) students at a entering/emerging, transitioning and advanced level will receive instruction in English through ENL methodologies. If the students have shown development in the second language, time allocated for ENL met 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of the year, NYSESLAT data and RLAT data is disseminated during grade level meeting as well as during IPC’s. Our data indicates the many of our ELLs while have made significant progress in reading continue to struggle with both reading and writing skills. During common planning time and teacher time, teachers triangulate and disaggregate different data points to develop action plans to support our ELLs. Based on the needs of the student, teachers develop instructional strategies to support the students. For example there is a correlation between struggling readers and students scoring low on reading and writing modalities of NYSESLAT as they are directly related to reading comprehension. To support students in 2018-19 CEP 64  develop language skills and to build fluency and comprehension teachers are utilizing oral language development techniques. Teachers in grades K-8 utilize use read alouds, plan for book clubs and shared reading to develop language skills and reading fluency. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS/MS 279 is a kindergarten to eighth grade school that houses one kindergarten, one first grade, one second grade, one fourth grade, contained fourth grade, a freestanding departmentalized seventh grade, and a push-in/pull-out ENL program. In our freestanding self contained third and sixth grade classes, students are grouped heterogeneously, and the teacher delivers all the subjects including stand alone ENL and integrated ENL. In the freestanding departmentalized eighth grade class, students are grouped heterogeneously, and the ENL teacher delivers the ENL and ELA subjects; students travel together to the other content area subjects. In our ENL program, ENL teachers provide 180 minutes of Integrated ENL for transitioning and expanding levels. For beginner level teachers provide 180 minutes of Integrated ENL and 180 minutes Stand Alone ENL weekly. For low transitioning level teachers provide 180 minutes of Integrated ENL and 180 minutes Stand Alone ENL weekly. We ensure that the number of instructional units of ENL-stand-alone/integrated- for each level are provided according the proficiency level, and that ENL/ELA units of instruction are aligned to the mandated units required by CR Part 154 Regulation. In addition Stand Alone ENL is grouped by grade ensuring that Stand Alone ENL instruction is content based and tied to grade level curriculum. b. TBE program. If applicable. In Kindergarten, First grade, Second grade,fourth grade and Fifth grade and Eighth grade we have transitional bilingual (Spanish) classes. The Transitional Bilingual Education program includes an ENL component designed to develop skills in listening,speaking, reading, and writing in English ( based on proficiency levels it varies from 360 minutes to 180 minutes) ; a minimum of 2 content-area courses/subjects in the home language (science and math), and English; a home language arts component designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in the student's’ home language. All of the students in a TBE program share the same home language, students are grouped heterogeneously, and teachers deliver all the subjects including standalone ENL, integrated ENL, Home language Art. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? For K to 8th ENL/ELA -The Entering level receive 2 units of study per week, 1 unit of study in stand-alone ENL (180 min.) and 1 unit of study in integrated ENL/ELA (180), a total of 360 minutes per week.-The Emerging level receive 2 units of study per week, .5 units of study in stand-alone ENL (90 min.), 1 unit of study in integrated ENL/ELA (180 min.) the .5 units can be stand Alone ENL or integrated ENL/Content Area, a total of 360 minutes per week.-The Transitioning level receive 1 unit of study in ENL per week, .5 units of study in integrated ENL/ELA (90 min.), .5 units of study can be stand-alone ENL or Integrated ENl/Content Area, a total of 180 minutes per week - The Expanding level receive 1 unit of study in integrated ENL per week (180 min.), 1 unit of study in integrated ENL/ELA or other Content Area. - 2018-19 CEP 65  Commanding/former ELLs receive .5 unit of study per week of integrated ENL in ELA or Content Area. For K to 8th Transitional Bilingual Program-The Entering level receive 1 unit of study in stand-alone ENL (180 min.) and 1 unit of study in integrated ENL/ELA (180 min.), a total of 360 minutes per week; 1 Home Language Arts class and 2 classes of Bilingual Content Area subjects. -The Emerging level receive 2 units of study per week, .5 units of study in stand-alone ENL (90 min.), 1 unit of study in integrated ENL/ELA (180 min.) the .5 units can be stand Alone ENL or integrated ENL/Content Area, a total of 360 minutes per week. 1 Home Language Arts class and 2 classes of Bilingual Content Area subjects. -The Transitioning level receive 1 unit of study in ENL per week, .5 units of study in integrated ENL/ELA (90 min.), .5 units of study can be stand-alone ENL or Integrated ENl/Content Area, a total of 180 minutes per week . 1 Home Language Arts class and 1 class of Bilingual Content Area subjects. - The Expanding level receive 1 unit of study in integrated ENL per week (180 min.), 1 unit of study in integrated ENL/ELA or other Content Area. 1 Home Language Arts class and 1 class of Bilingual Content Area subjects. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In order to meet high academic standards, ELL students benefit from the same curriculum as their English proficient counterparts. Across the grades in literacy, this is implemented through the Teachers College Reading and Writing curriculum and in math through Engaged NY program. All grades utilize these programs to work toward proficiency in the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). All instruction is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards in order to assist students in meeting grade level benchmarks, as well as to continue on the path to college and career readiness. During the instructional day, the ENL teachers serving students in Integrated ENL classes collaborate with classroom teachers to identify areas of need among our ELLs. ENL teachers use the New Language Arts Progressions and ENL best practices to scaffold instruction for our ELLs, including: use of visuals, TPR activities, songs and chants, graphic organizers and re-teaching strategies. In addition to these strategies, our ENL teachers also use Guided Reading, Wilson, Just Words, Lexia and Language Power to work with our ELLs. ENL teachers provide additional vocabulary instruction as well as bilingual glossaries and bilingual books to scaffold the instruction taking place in the classroom. In addition to receiving the same instruction in Mathematics, Science and Social Studies instruction as their counterpart, ELL's at PS/MS 279 benefit from other interventions. Students are part of early morning ELL academy as well as being grouped by proficiency in after school program using Title III funding. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At PS/MS 279 we strive to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language. As per New York State’s New Language Arts Progressions entering and emerging ELLs are allowed to demonstrate their literacy skills in both their home language and new language. We identify the native language through analysis of the Home Language Survey and subsequently provide native language scaffolding support through interventions as well as encourage students to use their native language as support to determine word composition and meaning. Upon arrival to class, all ELLs are instructed to write a baseline of their chosen topic, typically a narrative detailing an event in the native language to determine proficiency in their native language. In the case that we do not have a pedagogue who is a speaker of the student's native language we instruct the ELL to write his/her baseline and then contract a translator to perform such service. Since the majority of our ELLs are native Spanish speakers, there are many opportunities for them to show what they know. For example, our students who are ELLs can choose to take the New York State Mathematics and Science tests in Spanish. Also, our school is implementing the use of the New York City Performance Tests, which are available in Spanish for our Spanish dominant ELLs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 66  a. SIFE We currently have 42 SIFE students across the grade levels. In order to address these students’ needs, we are working through the following steps: assess the student(s) to identify areas of strength and need, place the student based on those strengths and weaknesses, employ additional intervention services and ongoing assessment to monitor progress. As with all students at our school, differentiated instruction will be implemented to ensure the SIFE student's needs are met. Given that PS/MS 279 has 42 SIFE students, these students will be a part of the ELL Academy during which, in addition to literacy skills, socialization skills and appropriate school behavior will be introduced if necessary. Students in this academy will use Project Based Learning, Language Power, researched based program such as Lexia to support in Language Acquisition. Wherever possible these students will be paired up with a "buddy" in the classroom who has the same home language to serve as a friend. b. Newcomer Newcomers at PS/MS 279 receive the mandated number of minutes per their proficiency level. Instruction during Stand Alone ENL and Integrated ENL periods is based on student needs as per data from various assessments given throughout the school year. These ELLs are closely monitored in their classrooms by their classroom teachers as well as their ENL teachers to ensure they are progressing academically. Both the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher examine the students’ data, make observations of the students and confer with students to assess their needs. Once the students’ needs are identified, the ENL teacher creates an intervention plan. Progress will be constantly monitored and if the intervention does not seem to be working, the teachers will meet to reassess the instructional plan. It is our plan that the students that are not making any progress will become part of Response to Intervention (RTI) groups in the areas that the data shows they are lacking. They will then receive targeted instruction during Strategic Reading Period. Since students are now required to test after one year, classroom data and simulation data is analyzed to determine next steps. We are creating an articulation time between classroom teachers and ENL teachers to collaboratively analyze student work. c. Developing Depending on their proficiency level, and their individual needs, ELLs receiving services four to six years will havetheir data reviewed and analyzed by an in-house Data Inquiry committee. Within the mandated amount of minutes for the student’s proficiency level, ENL strategies and alternative academic interventions will be applied. Progress will be constantly monitored and if the intervention does not seem to be working, the teachers will meet to reassess the instructional plan. Again, areas of student need in ENL are targeted during Stand Alone ENL and Integrated ENL periods. Thesestudents will also be invited to attend Title III academy and/or ELL academy d. Long-Term ELLs. Based on our current data, we have 17 long-term ELLs. Depending on their proficiency level, and their individual needs, long term ELLs will have their data reviewed and analyzed by an in-house Data Inquiry committee. Within the mandated amount of minutes for the student’s proficiency level, ENL strategies and alternative academic interventions will be applied. Progress will be constantly monitored and if the intervention does not seem to be working, the teachers will meet to reassess the instructional plan. These students will also be invited to attend Title III academy and /or ELL academy e. Describe your plan for former ELLs: A list of former ELLs is kept along with the current ELL list to ensure that our ENL teachers are providing mandatedservices; 90 minutes per week to students 2 years after they are classified as former ELLs. Former ELLs at PS/MS 279 receive all testing accommodations that they are entitled to on all assessments. These accommodations include: extended time, separate location and bilingual glossaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At PS/MS 279, ELLs students identified as having special needs, the current IEP is reviewed by ENL teachers and related service provider to review these students data to identify areas of strength and weakness to be addressed during ENL 2018-19 CEP 67  instruction. Within the mandated amount of minutes for the student’s proficiency level, ENL strategies and appropriate academic interventions will be provided. Our ENL teachers will continue to employ strategies such as visual representations, concrete materials, reciprocal teaching to enhance student learning. We will integrate language development across the curriculum. Vocabulary will be taught during any and all lessons. Teachers will identify vocabulary words and categorize them in tiers. This strategy is critical for the teacher to determine the words and supports needed to teach in priority. Students will use any technology program (Lexia) used in the school that best fits the needs of a particular student. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The population that has special needs will receive additional instructional time in the subject or skill of major need; their needs will be continually addressed by closely reviewing the student's’ Individualized Educational Plans (IEP). We make every attempt to adapt and modify curriculum to meet the needs of our ELL-SWD's. Classroom teachers, ENL teachers and Related Service Providers ensure there is an understanding of lesson objectives through formal and informal assessment and by analyzing student work. Teachers will continue to supplement and scaffold lessons using visual and kinesthetic activities . A reading intervention program (Wilson) will be integrated in the literacy program along with TCWRP. Student programming is modified to account for such tiered intervention that involves push-in or pull-out service. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELLs are eligible for all of the Academic Intervention Services offered based on their academic needs. In ELA, we support our Common Core literacy curriculum with resources and activities that address the needs for our ELL students such as collaborative learning techniques, leveled books that accommodate the diverse reading levels, providing scaffolds , and using standards based technology programs. In reading, strong emphasis is on strengthening reading comprehension skills and increasing vocabulary. Emphasis is also placed on developing critical thinking skills. In writing, students practice all aspects of writing including assessment writing. In math, effort is put in building a strong foundation in basic math skills, reinforcement and practice of important skills in order for them to accomplish the core topics of their respective grade. We differentiate instruction addressing students’ needs and performance. Particularly for level 1 and 2 students, teachers generate manipulative-based lessons to support them effectively. Through ENL Professional Development programs, our newly hired staff will learn to implement proven ENL strategies and techniques such as the use of music, pictorial representations, activating prior knowledge, building background, kinesthetic activities, and body language in order to help students succeed academically.Currently we use the following researched based programs for ELA Academic Intervention Services: Fundations (Gr. K-3) Wilson (Gr. 3-6) Just Words (Gr. 4-6) Lexia (Gr. K -8) Language Power (Gr. K-8). Additionally we use Fundations ( word study program) and Guided Reading for students in grades K-3. The Intervention Services are provided to our students in a variety of methods – via small group during the school day, the after school program and ELL Academy. Our assessment data indicates that across the grades our ELL students struggle the most with literacy. As the result of this observation, our teachers are working with groups of students comprised mostly of ELLs in an effort to assist these students in successfully achieving their literacy goals. In Math we use the following programs/strategies for Mathematics Intervention: Engage NY! Intervention and re-teaching resources and data driven, teacher planned intervention lessons. We also provide an after-school spring Science Academy for 4th grade students to enhance their experiences and knowledge of the scientific method.During Social Studies and Science the ENL teacher pushes in giving students access to the content by providing them with ENL strategies. For example during class the teacher provides students with a graphic organizer or chunks the text. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? PS/MS 279 will continue to implement Engage NY Curriculum for math in grades K-8. We will continue to implement Teachers College Reading and Writing Program in literacy along with Estrellita, an accelerated beginning reading program that utilizes a proven, systematic, accelerated approach to teaching phonics and syllables in Spanish. We will continue using Lexia, a technology research based program, to provide personalized learning for students of all ability levels. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 CEP 68  PS/MS 279 has a TBE program and will continue to offer the program to students who qualify. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. School offers additional instructional programs to help students in all grades and programs, including bilingual/ENL students. Particularly for ELL students, we offer Title lll after school/tutoring program in the subject and language of the students' needs. Additionally we offer an ELL academy three mornings a week. CHCF our Community Based Organization offers students a science-based curriculum to support instruction and improve academic achievement in science in grades 1 to 8. Programs offered are announced by sending letters/flyers home, and in our monthly calendar that is sent to every student’s house. We also use our parent coordinator to contact parents of students that we did not get any respond. There is a large percent of ELL participation in these programs 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students develop their reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills in English through a variety of ENL methodologies aimed at maximizing students’ understanding of newly introduced concepts, such as: Total Physical Response (TPR), chanting, rhyming, building background, activating prior knowledge, using graphic organizers, using metacognitive strategies, the use of bilingual glossaries and pictorial representations. Teachers have also differentiated instruction by grouping, as per Running Record and Spring NYSESLAT results. They also use informal assessments, conferencing and teacher observations in other subject areas, such as Mathematics and Science, to differentiate instruction. Intervention materials are chosen based on student need, but some of the materials used are Just Words program, Wilson, Lexia and Language Power. In the content areas, text books are used in both English and native language. In literacy, we use a variety of genres and leveled books in both languages. Books are meaningful literature, culturally susceptible and toward the interests and experiences of the ELL students. In math we use Engage NY in both languages. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our Transitional Bilingual Program we support the academic and linguistic development of the students in the native language until students achieve a level of English that will allow them to function in an English only class. Although an ENL program does not provide instruction in the student's’ native language, our ENL program is sensitive to the first language and culture of the students. In addition, as per New York State’s New Language Arts Progressions entering and emerging students are allowed to use both their home language and new language when reading and writing in an ENL program. Most of our ELLs are Spanish speaking and therefore many of our teachers are able to provide Native Language support as necessary. PS/MS 279 has a number of books in Spanish as well as bilingual glossaries for students use. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We draw on the student’s age to service and support ELL students with academic and nonacademic activities. Since all teachers including ENL teachers review student data, they are aware of students' levels and academic performance. When grouping for ENL services, intervention, tutoring, creating library we group students by grades, consequently by age, using age appropriate activities and resources. Services provided by the school/school counselors address the personal and social necessities challenging each age. They present topics according to the age and needs- safety, discipline, health, drugs among others. In addition, in our ENL program, Stand Alone ENL is generally grouped by grade, for example all entering and emerging First graders will be pulled together for Stand Alone ENL and all entering and emerging 2nd Graders will be pulled separately, etc. This ensures that Stand Alone ENL instruction is content based and tied to grade level curriculum. Students at the transitioning and expanding level receive service in a push-in setting where the ENL teacher works closely with content area teacher and provides the language acquisition, vocabulary support and any other needs that students may have related to content. For students at the entering and emerging level, the ENL service is provided in a pull-out setting. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 2018-19 CEP 69  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For newly enrolled ELL students, we provide ENL and bilingual services during summer school program. Teaching plans during summer program include trips to different places, museums, parks, botanical gardens, zoo, and other places depending on the unit of study. Parents of students in all grades are invited to orientations to familiarize themselves with the school building, the school staff and the curriculum in their child(ren)’s grade. Parents are also informed of the school’s procedures and policies at these orientations. Letters are posted outside of the school in late August informing parents of the beginning of the year procedures and important upcoming dates. At the end of the year in June, parents of ELLs are engaged in conversations about the school and the ELL programs at our school when they bring their child into the school for testing. Students who enrol in Kindergarten are provided an overview with an Orientation that is usually held in June. This is an opportunity to for parents to meet the staff and administration and get themselves oriented to the different aspects of the school community. Throughout the year parents are invited to attend Curriculum night, Open Forums and parent-engagement to meet with their child’s teacher(s) and get themselves acquainted with the classroom expectations. During the summer month, Summer Enrichment Program is offered by DOE to continue to support the social/ emotional and academic skills of the students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? PS/MS 279 currently does not offer any language electives 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently PS/MS 279 does not have a Dual Language Program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Instructional personnel who service ELL students, include all common branch teachers, subject area teachers, ENL teachers, paraprofessionals and special education teachers. Teachers will be provided with professional development throughout the school year pertaining to but not limited to ELL population. Professional development will occur during common planning time, grade level meetings, content meetings, lunch and learns, faculty conference and during professional development days such as Election Day. This year, PS/MS 279 has revised their calendar and scheduled 5 Half Professional Development days for teachers to meet and plan for students. Additionally, we offer Professional Development on Mondays and Tuesdays after school for all staff. Professional development for instructional personnel who service ELL students is facilitated by teacher leaders in our building, coaches and members of our ENL staff receive weekly e-mails from the Office of English Language Learners highlighting professional development opportunities for educators of ELLs. These opportunities are shared with administration and typically administration will select teachers, ENL or non- ENL, to attend. Any ENL or non-ENL teacher who wishes to attend these professional development opportunities can do so upon approval from administration. When a member of the staff attends a training that he or she feels would be beneficial to the whole staff, that teacher will turnkey the information to interested staff members. These turnkeys may take place during their common planning time or lunch and learn session. Professional development is also offered by the administration as well as in house ENL teachers on Election Day or during our Professional Development sessions, in-house, to explain the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT tests, RTI for ELLs and other intervention programs, strategies and how the scores can help to further expand teachers’ understanding about the tests 2018-19 CEP 70  their students are required to take and how to use the ENL data to drive instruction. A segment on ENL strategies essential for ELL students will give staff members the ability to embed various ENL strategies into their planning so that teaching and learning can be most effective All teachers are invited to attend our weekly Professional Development session on Monday and Tuesday afternoons. These sessions are facilitated by our literacy coaches, math coach, ENL teachers and other staff members who have attended PD sessions and training session outside of our building. The Professional Development sessions focus on differentiating instruction for different learners including ELLs. With the rollout of new curriculum at PS/MS 279, we provide opportunities such as lunch and learn for teachers to meet and plan and share strategies that would support our ELL population in every class. The school is part of Teacher's College Reading and Writing Curriculum which is aligned to Common Core Standards. Teachers attend professional development with the TC coaches and are part of inter visitations. They are also part of Professional Learning Community that focuses on literacy development through Common Core. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. PS/MS 279 continuously seeks opportunities for ENL targeted professional development for our teachers and staff. Fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers will be dedicated to language acquisition, emphasizing on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, concentrating on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. These opportunities will include workshops from RTI for ELLs Institute and the Office of English Language Learners. When a staff members attend one of these professional development sessions, he or she will turnkey relevant information according to the staff members, all teachers or/and bilingual and English as a new language teachers. Agendas of training that teachers attend are maintained in the School's Professional Development Binder. Additionally all in-house professional development logs and sign in sheets are maintained in the Professional Development Binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to mandated parent meetings, teachers of ELLs utilize Tuesday parents engagement to schedule meetings with parents/guardians of English Language Learners to discuss the goal of the program. Eventually, teachers will schedule meetings to discuss the language development and/or assessment results of their children as well. Interpretation services and translators are utilized for parents of other language speakers. To answer question #2, teachers will keep a log of documentation of all individual meetings with parents. A binder will be kept accessible when needed. T & I Interpretation services are utilized when meetings with parents. Teachers utilize 1-800 Language Line number to access languages so that they can speak to all parents regardless of their language preferenceservices 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement takes place through the Parent Coordinator, The Parent-Teacher Association (it offers parents and teachers an opportunity to share ideas and work collaboratively). Monthly Open-Family forum. The School Leadership Teams (parents, teachers, and administration work together on School Leadership Teams to make important decisions about our schools). Parent-Teacher Conferences are held at minimum twice per year – once during the fall term and once during the winter term. Also, Saturday classes are offered to parents of ELL students. Translation is provided at each meeting. Additionally parents of ELLs are given opportunities to attend all family activities and programs at our school. At the beginning of the year 2018-19 CEP 71  ELL Family Orientation is hosted to inform parents of the various program choices. In the fall parents have the opportunities to attend the Curriculum Night that is held at every grade level facilitated by teachers. This meeting provides parents with the opportunity to learn about the curriculum goals and supports for their children. All materials are presented in both English and Spanish. Translators are available for parents to ask questions, and understand their child’s academic and social development. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jean Dalton Encke, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Captain Manuel Rivera School DBN: 10x279 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jean Dalton Encke Title Principal Shehnaz Hashim Assistant Principal Samantha Velez Parent Coordinator Sarah Schott ENL/Bilingual Teacher Hiedi Colon Elba Perez N/A Rosa Lofgren Margaret Clarcke Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Judith Galarza School Counselor Maribelle Hulla Olga Glenn Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/20/2017 9/20/2017 9/20/2017 9/20/2017 9/201/2017 9/20/2017 1/1/01 9/20/2017 9/20/2017 9/20/2017 9/20/2017 9/20/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 74  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X279 School Name: The Captain Manuel Rivera Jr. Superintendent: MaribelHulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Shehnaz Hashim Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The demographics of PS/MS279 population consist of 44.13% English, 53.54% Hispanic and 1.29% Bengali or other. Data are inquired through ATS report, RAPL and the UPPG; Home Language Survey; initial interview; blue card data and teacher survey (collected data by class). Based on the data, our language interpretation need is determined. Since the majority of our student population is Hispanic, all written communication that is distributed to parents is given out in both English and Spanish. T & I Interpretation services are utilized when meetings with parents. Teachers utilize 1-800 Language Line number to access languages so that they can speak to all parents regardless of their language preference. The school uses SAM funds to hire on-site interpreters to help mediate a meeting, translate documents in parent's preferred language. 2018-19 CEP 75  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Fernch Arabic Mandinka Soninke Bambara Fulani 549 666 16 1 1 1 4 3 2 44.13 53.54 1.29 .08 .08 .08 0.32 0.24 0.16 542 670 17 0 1 1 4 3 5 43.57 53.86 1.37 0 .07 .08 0.32 0.24 .04 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Principal's Welcome message September Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In house staff members. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, for parents that require translation in their preferred language, if it is a DOE covered language such as Arabic, Bengali, Spanish, we download documents templates from the DOE intranet. If it is a not a DOE covered language, such as Mandingo, we use a DOE vendor to translate the document. or if it is appropriate we will assign a staff to 2018-19 CEP 76  Principal Memo's and Parent Letters monthly NYS Assessments Annual Report cards, flyer, newsletter, after school program information Ongoing, year long call the parent using language line to inform them of the event. In house staff members. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, for parents that require translation in their preferred language, if it is a DOE covered language such as Arabic, Bengali, Spanish, we download documents templates from the DOE intranet. If it is a not a DOE covered language, such as Mandingo, we use a DOE vendor to translate the document. or if it is appropriate we will assign a staff to call the parent using language line to inform them of the event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate assessment documents. However, during testing we utilize SAM funds to hire interperters to translate assessments for our students. in house staff member. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, for parents that require translation in their preferred language, if it is a DOE covered language such as Arabic, Bengali, Spanish, we download documents templates from the DOE intranet. If it is a not a DOE covered language, such as Mandingo, we use a DOE vendor to translate the document. or if it is appropriate we will assign a staff to call the parent using language line to inform them of the event. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to  Open school night.  September provide interpretation service(s)? Formal face- to face meetings are regularly held with parents 2018-19 CEP 77   Parent teacher conferences.  3 time a year, November, March and May Parent workshops  Ongoing through out the year.  Tuesday Parent Engagement time.  Ongoing through out the year. throughout the school year. These meetings include but are not limited to open school night during the first week of September, Parent Orientation, parents teacher conferences during the months of November, March and June. Our Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays are also utilized by teachers to meet with parents individually or hold grade level workshops. Simultaneous workshops are held by teachers in English and Spanish. Parents are given the opportunity to select the session in the language of their choice. For parents that speak other languages, we utilize n-house staff to interpret for the parent. However, for parents who have a preferred language not covered by school staff, when appropriate we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line or hire a DOE Vendor to send an on-site interpreter. During Parent Teacher conferences we utilize n-house staff to interpret for the parent. However, for parents who have a preferred language not covered by school staff, when appropriate we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line or hire a DOE Vendor to send an on-site interpreter. Simultaneous workshops are held by teachers in English and Spanish. Parents are given the opportunity to select the session in the language of their choice. For parents that speak other languages, we utilize the Language and Interpretation unit for translation. In house staff members, teachers. We utilize the interpretation as necessary. 2018-19 CEP 78  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency all school personnel will be engaged in providing families with pertinent information. Since 80% of our population is Hispanic and approximately 60% of our staff members speak Spanish we will be able to disseminate the information in a timely manner. For families that speak language other then Spanish, other staff bilingual staff members will be called upon to translate as well as translation service will be utilized to provide families with necessary information. Teachers will be provided with a list of their students names with their parent's preferred language and contact information. They will also be provided with the 1-800 Language Line number allowing them to access 200 ;us languages so they can speak to all parents at any time. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Training about language service is provided to appropriate school staff such as classroom teachers, guidance counsellor, parent coordinator. The training includes information on school's role in facilitating the provision of Language Access services, translation and over the phone interpretation services from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. We obtain signs for posting and Language Identification Cards for identifying parent's primary language. Translation funds are utilized as necessary and all teaches and staff receive a copy of the " I speak....." cards which includes the phone number for over the phone interpretation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As a school, we continue to fulfill Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 (Translation) by making available translation and interpretation services for parents, providing timely translation and distribution of critical communications. All material is distributed is in English and Spanish. For families that speak languages other than English and Spanish, we utilize bilingual staff member that can speak the language and provide parent with translation. For the parents of languages not spoken by our school personnel and or not covered by the DOE translated materials we will utilize Language Line to inform parents. At the beginning of the year we will be posting additional signage around the school in the languages spoken by the all the parents who have children at our school . This will allow staff to access 200 plus languages so they can speak to all parents regardless of preferred language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 79  To ensure the quality of the language service we will collect feedback from parents through survey distributed to school from the Translation and Identification Unit. For each workshop or activity we will schedule group of parents representing all cultures and languages in our school to gather feedback about how successful or useful has been our services so that it can be improved. Also, our staff is constantly listening to the parents’ concerns and having conversation about their needs. 2018-19 CEP 80 
