2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X284 School Name: BRONX SCHOOL OF LAW AND FINANCE Principal: JESSICA GORING 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Bronx School of Law and Finance 10x284 321000011284 9, 10, 11, 12 School Number (DBN): 99 Terrace View Ave., Bronx, NY 10463 7185610113 7185610595 Phone Number: Dr. Jessica Goring Fax: jgoring@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Dr. Jessica Goring Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Lisa Rocco Virginia Lloyd Tyrone Iton Jose Lara YovelysGerman Ginfrey Gonzlez n/a Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn rcintron@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5124 Phone Number: 718-368-8515 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Affinity Group FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-2246 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr Jessica Goring Lisa Rocco Vanessa Lloyd ZoraidaTorres Jose Lara GinfreyGonzalez YovelysGerman Tyrone Iton *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ CSA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Susan Ho Nieves Lopes Paula Parra AmariisDominguez Ana Sanchez YsabelParra Member/ UFT Member/ PA Member/ PA Member/ PA Member/UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Bronx School of Law and Finance aims to provide each of our students with the necessary skills and abilities to pursue higher education, through the introduction of careers in law and finance. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We offer Latin as a foreign language for all our students. Our Latin curriculum takes a holistic approach to language acquisition, and includes hands-on projects, skits, and cultural and historical activities. Students need only one year of a foreign language and no Regents exam in order to fulfill the language requirement for graduation, but we are encouraging all our students to take two to three years of Latin. Additionally, students must pass the Latin LOTE in order to qualify for an advanced diploma. Technology is infused into all curricular areas through the use of in-classroom computers in the sophomore Law and Finance class, an after school Media Center , and student computers in the office that may be used before school, after school, and during lunch. Tenth grade students participate in the Stock Market Game, a city-wide competition analyzing stock prices over the Internet. In addition, a tenth-grade cross-curricular project on the Metropolitan Museum of Art was completed via computer-aided informational brochures created by the students. Finally, many teachers use Powerpoint presentations within their classes. We offer a number of key experiences that correlate to our theme of law and finance. For the first two years of our school, students take courses introducing them to both law and finance. In their third year, students select a major in either law or finance, and their coursework for their remaining years follows accordingly. Courses we offer to law majors include Constitutional law, Criminal law, Civil law, Court Procedures, and Brief Writing. Courses we offer to finance majors include Accounting I and II, Wall Street, Banking, and International Finance. Additionally, we are utilizing our connections to the Justice Resource Center and to the National Academy Foundation in order to supplement the experiences and field work of our students. In the 2004-2005 school year for example, our law students participated in moot court, mock trial, and visited the Hispanic National Bar Association Youth Convention, Denton Law Firm, the DEA, and Credit Suisse. Our finance students participated in job shadowing programs at the United Nations, American Express, attended a NAF conference, and joined exploring careers programs at Bovis Lend Lease, AT&T, and others. Our students participate in the Lehman College College Now Program, which enables our students to take classes on Lehman College’s campus for college credit. We also offer a few Advanced Placement classes and work with the Let’s Get Ready SAT program.. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Officially a school in 2004, the Bronx School of Law and Finance opened as a program on the eighth floor of John F. Kennedy High School , located in the Marble Hill section of the Bronx , in September of 2003. Currently we have 387 students from a total of 13 different countries. Our mission is that by exposing students to careers in Law and in Finance, we will encourage them to pursue higher education. We are a representative population of the Bronx . According to the latest available ethnic data, approximately 55% of our students are Latino, 37% are African-American, 3% are White and 4% are Asian. Approximately 23% of our 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  students have Individualized Education Plans (IEPs) and receive integrated inclusion classes, and related services such as counseling and resource room. Additionally, approximately 10% of our students are English language learners (ELLs), with Spanish as the dominant language among the vast majority. The specific needs of our ENL students lie in their incoming designation as Entering or Emerging English language learners. The majority of students are from low-income families and more than 85% qualify for free lunch. Additionally, we have a large number of students who are part of special populations in our school. Approximately 27% of our students are Special Education students, and we offer mostly ICT classes to service their needs (as appropriate). Our Special Education students' needs include both Emotional and Learning challenges. This year, we are proud to announce that our school is a Lab site for other schools whose ICT classes need additional work. We are also approximately 30% ENL students, including Commanding Level ENLs, with students from 13 different countries. We incorporate our ENL students and our Special Education students in all activities that our General Education students have access to, and also include a Multicultural club, ENL classes for parents, and a thriving summer program for our ENL students in order to acclimate them and their families to our community. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our biggest challenge facing us, and the key area of focus for our school is attendance. We understand the connection between good attendance and success in school. We utilize the services of school aides, a family worker, and counselor to contact homes and hold conferences with parents, in order to encourage good attendance. We will continue to work with an attendance teacher provided by the Region, to conduct home visits when necessary. Attendance feeds into other areas of school, including credit accumulation, performance on the Regents exams, and ultimately graduation. Additionally, higher attendance generally results in higher grades, and we are pushing our students into higher areas of college and career The push toward higher attendance rates falls under a few different elements of the Framework for Great Schools. In addition to the more obvious area of school/family ties, attendance is also correlated with both supportive environment and academic rigor--two elements on the framework that we pay particular attention to fostering. The element of the Framework for Great School on which our school made the most progress on is that of collaborative teachers, where our teachers are committed to the success of their classrooms and school. Our teachers continually collaborate on how to best meet the needs of our students, and they actively pursue outside Professional Development opportunities, as well as take ownership of their capacity to grow as professionals. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X284 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 380 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 42 2 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 4 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 84.2% % Reduced Lunch 19.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 68.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 4% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 77% 51% 73.3% 3.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A N/A No N/A 107 101 15 80.3% 0.8% 23.7% 25.5% 1.3% 1.1% 4 50% 6.6 N/A N/A 72% 69% 77.3% 13% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school we have been addressing a number of Common Core related school-wide foci. We began many years ago with the Common Core rollout. Our focus was to first identify areas of needs, based on an analysis of student work products. We noticed the need of strengthening instruction. We determined that by addressing the CCLS standards and the Instructional Shifts across content areas and grade levels we could provide more rigorous instruction. We created our school goals and action plan to include Citation of Textual Evidence. This was our Citywide Instructional Focus during our first and second years. We did notice improvement in ELA classes as evidenced by summative assessments, including Regents pass rates. However, this also revealed there was still a performance gap in our subgroups: ELLs and Special Needs students, especially with Latino students who still did not make AYP. On our third year we revisited Citation of Textual Evidence and also introduced Counter Claim as the year's focus . This was done as a way of continuing to increase rigor. We developed an action plan that targeted learning activities for our subgroups. Teachers collaborated in identifying multiple entry points to address these subgroups' needs. We continued assessing throughout the year their performance and by introducing a protocol of Looking as Student Work (LASW) to measure their progress and identify learning targets. This past year, and as a result of our Learning Partners Project (LPP) associations we intervisit with to other schools to learn different practices. As a result we moved from the focus on skill development to the focus on pedagogy. We plan for this move by including all teachers in a series of Professional Development sessions. Teachers developed an Accountable Talk project, with the freshmen teachers and English 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  department first. After several Learning Walks and a series of Professional Development sessions (five in all, each one teacher-led), as well as the distribution of reminder cards, we have enjoyed some success, but are looking forward to honing Accountable Talk and student engagement even further next year. This to be done across the levels and content areas. The need for this has also been addressed in PPOs, and the Quality Review, and we are also hoping that a focus on the student-centered classroom will encourage higher attendance, higher overall pass rates, and stronger overall assessment on learning on an ongoing basis. In summary, our strengths with regard to Common Core is our school-wide focus on different Common Core skills, which provides cohesion and was evidenced by the 92% pass rate on the English Common Core exam in January of 2016. Our priority need will continue to be on increasing and tracking student engagement in all content areas by providing more CCLS aligned student centered activities that includes reflections and allows for students to actively measure their own learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers across core content areas will expand CCLS aligned lessons to include numerous and ongoing writing opportunities as a way of increasing the quality of overall student writing for all learners, especially for subgroups not making AYP, as measured by classroom visits, and as shown through a five-percent increase in the pass rate on the Algebra Regents examination. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal Assistant Principals Coaches Principal Assistant Principals Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During our professional development series, we will dedicate sessions to incorporating writing across the subject areas, and in every lesson, measuring student progress through formative and summative assessments and identifying performance trends for subgroups. This includes a special focus on the use of writing in the Algebra and other math classes. Additionally, we will roll out Atlas Rubicon in the first days of school. Teachers Para-Professionals We are instituting a new system of monitoring student progress in general toward college/career and academic goals through the used of a google document created for our Guidance team by New Visions. This document requires each Guidance Counselor, whom we have mapped to individual cohorts, to meet with and document student goals per semester, which the administration can monitor via the Google document. Teachers too are horizontally aligned to teacher leaders and are to document student progress. This will filter into the classrooms, and also be supported by student access to Skedula and to our newly-instituted grade level advisory system. Teachers, Guidance, Admin, Teacher leaders, students Sept 2018 (writing in the introductory PD) October 2018 (regular PD Mondays begin) May 2019 (Teachers should have had at least four writing PDs throughout year) Sept 2018 (training of Counselors) Sept 2018 (introduction of Advisories) Sept 2018 (students and parents received access to Skedula) October 2018 (regular grade team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  During cabinets and teacher teams meeting there will be a focus on how to analyze the tools (from our Affinity Group) to measure student progress, especially those not making AYP and subgroups, especially SWD and ELLs Students including ELLs SWD and those not making AYP Intervisitations will take place within our teacher teams. These teams will focus on assessing how our school addresses student engagement and activities that promotes student writing. Classroom Teachers Students meetings start) December 2018 (all students should have had at least one meeting with Guidance) May 2019 (all students should have had at least two meetings with Guidance) Sept 2018 (intro to data tools) November 2018 (at least four meetings on student progress should have happened) May 2019 (there should be at least two meetings per month on student progress) December 2018 (at least one set of intervisitations by 75% of our faculty) Principal Assistant Principals Coaches Data Tool Analysts Teacher Team Leads Principal LPP Assistant Principal LPP Teacher Teams 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  3b – Parent and Family Engagement May 2019 (at least three sets of intervisitations by 75% of our faculty) How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will have information from the teachers regarding their class expectations given to parents for the first Open School night in September. Additionally, there are follow up parent events throughout the year, where we specifically will address student progress toward the goal. These interactions between the parents and the teachers (and hopefully the child) help to bring the parent into the process of understanding what their child needs in order to be academically successful, and also encourages parents to partner with the school in helping their child to achieve. The parent's ideas on how to best help his/her child is a place for the teacher to figure out entry into the student's mindset. Additionally, our CEP goals are done in conjunction with our SLT, and they propose Parent Association meetings discussion the Common Core. During Parent meetings there will be presentations on explaining our focus on writing across the curriculum. In other sessions we will address strategies to help student succeed, including describing and providing examples of student-centered activities and appropriate writing activities and interventions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Principal; A.P. Special Education; New Visions pilot programs in A2I, Global History, Living Environment, and Blended Learning Communities; past New Visions Common Core work with curriculum; Teaching Staff of Law and Finance; Parent Coordinator (paid through teacher and supervisor per session) Instructional resources: how to read a transcript, Special Education law, handouts, PD through New Visions on Common Core, textbooks Schedule: permits, calendar of events, PD time, substitute teachers (per diem and coverages) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Formal and informal observations will be conducted during each term and feedback will reflect and measure the student-centered activities conducted in classes and the rate of student engagement. We will use the Danielson Framework rubric and the HEDI rating to measure teacher progress on developing student centered lessons and activities, which aligns to student ownership and progress toward Common Core alignment, with particular focus on writing. Additionally, we will monitor Guidance logs for student meetings and meet with the teacher leaders and see their meeting minutes regarding horizontal alignment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will continue to use the formative teacher generated checklist as the leading indicator to measures the use of accountable stems by students and student interactions in student centered activities. The Looking at Student Work protocol will be used as an additional formative assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. X 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? One of the strengths of Bronx Law and Finance is that students feel they are by their are known by teachers. They focus on learning and are not afraid to take risks. We have been able to introduce CCLS aligned activities such as using point of view; claims and counter claims as a way of engaging them in student centered activities. We have received positive feedback on this practice in our last Quality Review and PPO visits. Because of this, we are moving to an even more student centered approach whereby students will be taking responsibilities for engaging in meaningful conversations using accountable talks stems amongst each other that will ultimately result in assessing their own performance. The teacher will become a facilitator rather than leading the way. Despite the fact we received positive feedback, we feel there was a weakness on to our approach for not collecting the data to support how students felt when others disagreed with their statements. We want to ensure that our students know that they can respectfully disagree and still be safe. To that end, we will work on Accountable Talk as a major initiative and as part of the Learning Partner Project. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  In summary, we are taking what has been cited as a strength and move it to further refine it and therefore, we would do so by identifying it as one of our goals for the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By August 2019, through the work of our school community in addressing both academic as well as emotional supports needed, we will see our graduation rate rise by one percentage point to 80% or higher. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The guidance team will play a strong role in identifying and meeting with borderline seniors. This will be to track both academic progress, and goals after graduation. This will also be a marker to see if emotionally, issues have arisen that may impact the student regarding graduation. We have Guidance counselors who specialize in ENL students, and one who works exclusively with IEP students, which helps to address the needs of our entire student body. This will be tracked through our New Visions Guidance Counselor tracker. Professional development sessions addressing how to monitor student engagement, how to provide for a safe classroom environment conducive to learning and how to assess effectiveness of student centered activities will be included as session during the school year. Additionally, we are inviting in a consultant on students dealing with tragedy to see how our entire staff can assist in moving through emotional barriers that can prevent academic success, as well as continuing to work with Ramapo for student behaviors/emotional needs. Through collaborative teams meeting, observation feedback and individual teacher conversation the school will identify those students who are struggling and in need of extra support. Extra support will take the form of tutoring, counseling, or will be rewards-based. This process will be facilitated by our Advisory program. This will also address emotional supports potentially needed. This will be monitored through meeting minutes, as well as through cabinet meetings including the teacher leaders for each team. Please note too that we have strong ENL and Sped Departments who are fully integrated into these conversations. Guidance counselors, teachers will engage in providing additional support to target students and in engaging parents in conversations regarding their child’s progress and performance in classes. Part of this will be facilitated through the Advisory program, and also discussed in the horizontal team teacher meetings, facilitated by our Teacher Leaders. This will be monitored through our New Visions Guidance Counselor tracker, through meeting minutes, and through Skedula outreach logs. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Guidance, Students Sept 2018 Principal June 2019 Assistant Principals Teachers, Students, Guidance Counselor Sept 2018 Principal June 2019 Assistant Principals Teachers Sept 2018 Principal Students June 2019 Assistant Principals Guidance Counselors Students Sept 2018 Guidance Counselors Parents June 2019 Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will communicate this via letters, and via Curriculum Night. Additionally, having the parent present and engaged with the child in assisting them in goal setting and communicating to the teacher how to best approach their child is invaluable. Finally, the parent is invited to be engaged in the college process, providing information, weighing in on location, school, finances, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources, such as Administration, COSA, Parent Coordinator, Guidance (teacher and supervisor per session). Instructional resources such as cost of materials and use of technology (getting parents on Skedula, for example). Schedule adjustments with differing days and times of events, permits, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Midpoint (January 2019) the school will have information via our tracker, and team minutes, to see if we are on track for 80% graduation in August. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Our New Visions Guidance tracker and meeting minutes from our horizontal teams will help our school to measure progress toward meeting this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school that is 27.2% Special Education, and also 31% ELL students, teachers collaborating with each other on a regular basis is key. We noticed that over time our Special Education population has increased from approximately 16% to its current rate, and our ELL population doubled in size. Although we are proud of our impact with this portion of our school community, and focus a lot of attention on making their experience in our school a positive one, this has been the result of a lot of teacher development toward meeting the needs of all learners. Additionally, we know that our lowest attendance numbers are with our Special Education population, which circles back to our first goal of improving overall attendance, as well as our second goal of graduation rate increases. We are pulling together as a school community to help to achieve academic success through attending, monitoring, meeting the academic and emotional needs of students, etc.. Many teachers share students and can therefore share strategies, and many have to co-plan for their ICT classes. We currently do not have Circular 6R for Common Planning Time, and have to therefore get creative with the schedule in order to allow for teacher interaction. For next year, however, we have already changed the schedule so that teachers will go to a single session, and will have 100 minutes of Professional Development and common meeting time. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a minimum of 95% of teachers across grades and subjects will have engaged in ongoing PD sessions and common meeting times that focus on analyzing and adjusting for student progress, including for students who are English Language Learners and those with IEPs, and we will see a two percent increase in pass rates on the math Regents exams by students with IEPs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A comprehensive PD calendar and times for teacher team collaboration that address student progress, student emotional as well as academic support, and a focus on ENL and SWD students. Teachers will identify target groups and will include students from the following subgroups: ELLs, SWD, Lowest Third and students that are off-track to graduation A Curriculum Night dedicated to parents will provide information on courses/subjects offering, and on how to measure progress towards graduation. In addition the school will host monthly PA meeting and will include topics on how the school measures student progress and what are the benchmarks in each grade to be on track. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Guidance Counselors Admin Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teachers Guidance Counselors Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teachers Guidance Counselors Parent Coordinator na na na na 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will include parents in events such as Curriculum Night, as well as check-ins during the year. Parents meet with the teachers in order for both the home and the school to be on the same page with the approach to the child and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  his/her progress. Additionally, for our ENL parents, we offer a twice a week Parent ENL course. Additionally, all information at parent-related events are in both English and Spanish. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources, including Principal, A.P. Programming, ELL Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Guiidance Counselor, Special Education AP. Instructional resources, including Academic Vocabulary Workbooks and other texts, dictionaries, technology. Schedule adjustments, with in particular the use of circular 6R time for collaboration and planning, and PD time for ELLs and Special Education students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The school will conduct 8 Strategic Data check-ins in collaboration with the Partner Affinity School and will use the data to measure progress in the area of credit accumulation, Regents readiness and pass rate and in progress towards graduation. The quantifiable mid-point will be a 4% increase in the number of students passing their core courses at the end of the first term. In addition, the school will measure marking period grades to assess ongoing progress Finally, we will utilize mock Regents exams in the math classes in order to assess progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The quantifiable mid-point will be a 4% increase in the number of students passing their core courses at the end of the first term. The instruments of measures that are going to be used to assess progress are student grades in marking periods as well as the data tools that include comprehensive data for each student, During the Strategic data check-ins each student data will be analyze to identify on/almost and off-track students. We will focus too on their progress in Math, and in pushing them to sit for the Regents and to attend Regents tutoring. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. X 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This past year we focused on the best ways to use our school resources. We utilized data from our NYSED Report Card, survey results, and self-reflections with a team of teachers, our Student Government, and our Parents Association. We looked at how to improve and maximize student participation, not only in academic areas, such as tutoring, but in non-academic activities as well. We noticed that if we systematically and intentionally include our students in talking with them about their own progress they would develop a better sense of belonging in the school. Similarly, we also noticed that by addressing extra curricular activities and by promoting them within classrooms, rather than as school-wide events, the students responded better and consequently participated. For us this was a strength and we are looking to further increase the rate of student participation in non-academic, as well as academic activities. A weakness related to our practice was that the school was in double session and it prevented that those students in early session participated in some of school events. In addition, teachers focus were mostly geared towards teaching lessons and they were not fully engaging students in all aspects of school life and culture. We felt that if teachers were more involved and they could participate and encourage student participation, the school would have had a greater rate of student involvement and participation. To this end and moving forward, we will change our programmatic practices. We are focusing on not only having all students in a single session, but on providing teachers the opportunity to also be 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  on one session in order for them to become more involved in school life. This may increase opportunities for teachers to run clubs, to provide tutoring and to participate in college readiness activities. For next academic year, we are changing the school’s time to include only one single session. This will allow for all students to participate. We are also focusing on extending this practice in each grade to include college and career readiness activities. With this in mind, we have changed guidance counselors’ caseloads so they can address activities according to grade levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a sign of increased buy-in to the mission of our school and connection to our school community, our student and teacher rate of participation in school-based clubs and activities will increase by 10% as compared to last year's rate of participation, as measured by the number of clubs offered, and the number of students participating. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school schedule will be changed for both semesters to be one single session. Teachers will be giving the opportunity to participate in per session activities and to run clubs, offer tutorial classes and design college and career ready activities Teachers will meet to discuss creating an engaging student culture, as will members of the student government. There will also be a survey for students distributed at the beginning of the year regarding student participation and offerings. Teachers in classrooms will encourage student participation on school wide extracurricular activities Data analysis of students who are off track will be used after each marking period to determine and to encourage teachers to recruit as many students as possible to attend tutorial sessions Newsletters, messages and school wide announcement will give information of all school wide activities and opportunities Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Sept 2018- Principal Students June 2019 Assistant Principals G. Counselors Staff Teachers Sept 2018- Principal Assistant Principals Students June 2019 Teachers Sept 2018- Principal June 2019 Assistant Principals Teachers Sept 2018- Principal Students June 2019 Assistant Principal Parents Parent Coordinator G. Counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host a number of activities aimed at improving parent involvement, in addition to our ongoing Parent conferences, and in addition to our parent ENL course. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Throughout the year we will use communication such as newsletters, phone call messages to contact parents and notify students. Teachers will be offered per session opportunities as well as encourage to run clubs and develop college and career ready activities such as college night, college application workshops and college finance. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the mid point (January) the school will assess student participation, number of teacher participating and number of events per grade. This information will be used to assess progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The calendar of scheduled activities, per session sheets and attendance rosters from tutorial as well as sign in sheets for other activities will be used as the instrument to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their x SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our last Quality Review (March 2016) one of our school’s strengths is on establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, student and families and that provides support to achieve high expectations. However, we have had lower number of parent participation on many activities related to academic themes such as curriculum nights, college night and Open school night, as per our attendance sheets on those evenings, and via discussion in SLT. We see that activities such as graduation, Multicultural night and Awards night are the ones best attended, again as shown through our attendance records for parent events. We think this is a weakness, which we must address next year. We are also teaming with New Visions Humanities Charter High School in the building. They are very successful with parents participation and always have a good turnout for all their activities. We are part of the Mayoral District/Charter Initiative. We hope that this initiative will help us increase parent participation in school events including those targeted in engaging parents in better understanding their child academic demands. In addition, we plan on tracking student attendance by working with parents and using a text-set up known as “Kinvolved”. This is a phone app that enable teachers to easily take attendance and instantly and securely send notifications to parents if the student is absent. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a sign of parent support for our students and their academic progress, parent involvement in Parent Activities will have increased to at least 40% of our parent body physically participating in at least one parent activity during the school year, either at our school or at a community event on the school's behalf. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The school will continue to offer classes in English Language instruction on a weekly basis to all parents who are interested. Additionally, we will continue to have presentations by immigration lawyers on the rights of newcomers in New York City. Parents Sept 2018- Principal June 2019 Assistant Principals The school will have events to celebrate students and their success, such as the Multicultural Night, Awards Night, and a potential talent evening, in order to encourage parents to have a positive experience with their child's education. The school will also participate in community service outside of our physical institution, such as at the Breast Cancer walk. A parent meeting and a teacher meeting will be dedicated to explaining what is "Kinvolved" app, which calls home/texts based on attendance, how does it work and how to use it. In addition, teachers, parents and students will receive a calendar of parents activities for the Fall semester. Parents, Teachers Parent Coordinator Staff Parents Sept 2018- Principal June 2019 Assistant Principals staff Sept 2018- Principal Nov. 2018 Assistant Principals Attendance coordinator The school will have events dedicated to the college process, including FAFSA night, college bingo, etc., and with assist parents in helping their child to get into college. Parents Sept 2018 - Jan 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Guidance Counselors College Team Parent Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A (all school-based) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Principal, APs Parent Coordinator, teachers, students, parents, per session funds, resource materials for events, District Charter Initiative Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At midpoint, the school will measure progress by analyzing the number of parents that would have participated in the four projected events to see if there is a minimum of 5% increase in parent participation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will use attendance sheets for parents to sign in at each event. After each event the school will analyze attendance rate to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher grade team meetings and department inquiry work, detailing most needy students. Teacher grade team meetings and department inquiry work, detailing most needy students Teacher grade team meetings and department inquiry work, detailing most needy students Teacher grade team meetings and department inquiry work, detailing most needy students IEP and student requests or teacher or parent referrals Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Repeated reading, interactive writing, Common Core prep across courses, Practice problems, data driven instruction, work with Math Instructional Specialist, use of a Math Coach Repeated reading, interactive writing, Common Core prep across courses, work with a Science Instructional Specialist, Repeated reading, interactive writing, Common Core prep across courses, work with an Instructional Specialist Counseling as mandated and as requested Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, before and after school, Saturday program Small group, tutoring, one on one During the school day, before and after school, Saturday program Small group, tutoring Small group, tutoring During the school day, before and after school, Saturday program During the school day, before and after school, Saturday program Small group, one on one During the school day, after school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 32 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. depending on individual needs, it may be used for clothing, supplies, Senior Dues, or any number of materials needed in order to fulfill student needs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All staff members are considered highly qualified, and are teaching in the license area of their state certification. Additionally, all our teachers either already have a Masters degree, or are enrolled in a Masters program. As a school, we strongly promote Professional Development. Part of our SBO vote at the end of the year was to allow for a change in our school’s schedule that would give us as a professional community staff development on a weekly basis. Additionally, we continue to urge our teachers to seek professional development opportunities outside of the school, and have supported teachers in attending these events by paying them per session, or for parking, or for sub coverage, or even for entry fees. We have assigned mentors for our new teachers, as per the City agreement, and are also working with Instructional Specialists in the areas of Math and Science and Social Studies. Our goal of Danielson gives ongoing consistent feedback to all teachers as well, and we work on developing our staff to reach their optimal professional performance. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We do a minimum of three hours a month of Professional Development on Danielson and the Common Core, as per the mandated Professional Development requirements. Additionally, we provide PD inside and outside the school in these areas (including the Danielson, bringing the Teacher Effectiveness Coach to a PD session), and we allow for time to have horizontal and vertical meetings, in order to align with Common Core while fulfilling the professional community component of Danielson's Domain Four. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We meet at a MOSL committee in order to choose the measures that would best represent our school. After three meetings and more than a few hours, we arrived at a decision. The English Regents and the ELA assessments figure heavily, and we have been working with our English department closely to arrive at the results of the assessment, and to share said results with our staff as well as to bring the skills needed to our faculty for a whole school focus. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 20,000 0 0 0 11,200.00 0 2,675,520.00 x na na x x x x 5A, 5B, 5C, 5E na na n/a 5B n/a 5A, 5B, 5C, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Bronx School of Law and Finance, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Bronx School of Law and Finance will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing workshops that help parents to assist their students in the college process, including school fit, financial aid, and the application process. ● offering ENL classes to parents who need want to work on their English ● providing information to parents on the immigration and legal processes ● providing avenues and arenas for celebrating student success ● offering other routes to access information, including use of Kinvolved and Skedula 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children, particularly with regard to students with special needs ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and student performance in classes, as well as meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Bronx School of Law and Finance ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education At (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: We have instituted a number of programs this year for our 56 ENL students, in order to acclimate them both to our school community and to New York City, as well as in order to find a way to build on their strengths and their competencies. Our Title III supplemental programs occur after school, and on many Saturdays. For the 2018-2019 school year we are providing these services on an as-needed basis, which amounts to approximately three times a week, from 3:00 to 4:00, in both English and Spanish to support the content areas. Saturday Academies run in December and January and April, May, and June. Academically, we are doing English with Native Language support through our ENL-certified teachers, Ms. Ana Sanchez and Mr. Emmanuel Perez. Another extra support is the new language and content lab programs. For example, we are using Rosetta Stone and Achieve 3000. In order to help prepare our ENLs for the standardized exams, we identify the ENLs' levels of language, writing, reading, and math levels. This data we receive through the R-LAT, which breaks down the modalities and the scores over a three year period. We use this to compare the progress of the students. We also use the NYSESTELL/NYSESLAT to distinguish the different level of language. We then design and create a set of strategies to help ENLs develop and improve the skills needed for standardized exams and for life (for example, reading strategies, vocabulary in context, multiple choice and test-taking skills, and note-taking and writing steps). We analyze the ENL data, such as NYSESLAT scores, and previous reading/writing/math state exams, in order to modify instruction. We align and modify instruction based on students' needs and make sure that ENLs have the proper accommodations and modifications, such as extended time, separate location, native language exam versions, etc. For example, in our initial identification process, we discovered this year that we have just one entering level student, whereas last year we had eight. We also discovered that the majority of our students scored lowest on the writing components, and therefore we needed to concentrate more on the writing in order to provide appropriate support. We also inform and educate the parents about standardized exams in order to help the ENL student at home. In order to ensure that we are providing a rigorous program for our ENL students, we plan to utilize Achieve 3000, with focuses on literacy--reading and writing, at a higher level. Additionally, we align our content area in order to make connections to Common Core, ensuring, for example, that our ELL students work with citation of textual evidence, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52 rationale--The content classes, which are taught in English, are more difficult for these subgroups and grade levels of students to be served--all Entering and Emerging, all schedule and duration--three days a week, for about 30 minutes language of instruction--English with Native Language Support # and types of certified teachers--2 ENL teachers types of materials--grammar books, dictionaries and teacher-made materials in their Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information argumentation, and counterclaim. Additionally, for our native Spanish speakers, we offer both Advanced Placement Spanish Literature and Advanced Placement Spanish Language. Specifically, we use Title III funds in the following ways: BEFORE SCHOOL--work with Entering level (and Emerging) to be ready for their content classes (daily, 7:30 - 8:10) · students and we want them to feel success.&nbsp; This affects mostly the areas of Social Studies of Science. · grades · · · · native language AFTER SCHOOL--tutoring to reinforce both content and language to Entering and Emerging students (Tuesdays and Wednesdays, 2:30 - 3:30) · distance or cultural situations, and so we aim to capture them at a different time of day. · subgroups and grade levels of students to be served--Entering and Emerging, all grades · schedule and duration--twice a week, for about one hour · language of instruction--English and Native Language Support · # and types of certified teachers--2 ENL teachers · types of materials--same as before school, and also more technology used after school SATURDAYS--tutoring for Entering and Emerging students in content areas (December and January, and May and June, 8:00 - 1:00) · ENL students who are taking Regents/Common Core · · · · content areas · subgroups and grade levels of students to be served--open to all ENL students, all grades schedule and duration--in December and January, and in May and June, three hours language of instruction--English and Native Language Support # and types of certified teachers--2 ENL, and other content teachers who are tutoring in rationale--Some students are unable to get to the school early in the morning, because of rationale--as we approach the State examination sessions, we give extra support to our types of materials--technology, review materials, content-area textbooks Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part C: Professional Development · name of provider Begin description here: The school provides professional development for Title III program teachers, as well as other content teachers who have ENLs in their classes. A lot of the professional development offered is with the Common Core, and is aligned to ENL standards. There is also professional development on the intake process, research on the brain, and the use of native language as a tool for instruction We have two ENL teachers, who inform and share with their colleagues at our school information about our ENL population at the Bronx School of Law and Finance. They analyze the ENL data for instructional purposes and bring this to our staff as well. For their own edification, our ENL teachers will attended the following professional development workshops personally, and bring back information from them for our staff. Some of these are half day sessions, and others are full day: -NYSESLAT -Programming for ENL Services -ENL push-in -Title III training -ENL funding/compliance sessions -NYSITELL Additionally, teachers are also attending Saturday sessions on their own, and two of our teachers just completed their Masters in ENL. We have participated in professional development opportunities through New Visions, through our Affinity Network (at no cost to Title III), through the UFT, and also through providers our ENL teachers have found on their own, such as City College. Additionally, one of our ENL teachers is continuing on his Masters in Teaching English as a New Language, through no cost to Title III.. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Parents are invited to participate in a number of activities in order to support their students at the Bronx School of Law and Finance. Our highlight event for parents is our Multicultural Night, where parents contribute food and students put on a performance for students, faculty, and parents highlighting a cultural contribution from their native countries. Past performances have 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities included dances, poems, and a cultural dress fashion show. But additionally, we have hour-long programs for parents on homework, reading and writing workshops, family relationships, computer skills, and other activities that our Parent Coordinator has organized for parents in general. We also have ELL Family Night (mid-September and again in October), parent workshops in technology, and our highly successful ENL English classes for parents learning English as well. We hold orientation and Information for students' NYSESLAT scores and programs (at the beginning of each semester), and monthly multicultural activities to validate and honor parents' different cultures . All events and classes are about one hour in length and provided by our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Zoraida Torres (at no cost to Title III), and/or our ENL teachers, Ms. Ana Sanchez and Mr. Emmanual Perez. Letters and phone calls go out in both English and in the native language for parents, and we have students from our Honor Society on hand to help with translations. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount n/a n/a n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name The Bronx School of Law and Finance Borough Bronx School Number 284 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Jessica Goring Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ana Sanchez Teacher/Subject Area Emmanuel Perez/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Abigail Mansfeild/Englsish Related-Service Provider Anne Cantor/Counseling Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Lisa Coxson Coach type here School Counselor Aura Burgos Parent Paula Para Parent Coordinator Zoraida Torres Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 384 Total number of ELLs 67 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.45% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the LAB in Spanish, and a writing assessment in their ninth grade class. This shows us which areas we need to focus on for skill-building in our instruction, so that our students will improve. We use it for instructional purposes. e response to questions here: 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have teacher collaborative time, as well as tutoring time, in order to support this effort. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? During the year, we look at the support and interaction with our subject level teachers--the feedback gives our ELL Coordinator information that she uses in the modifications. We also look for the yearly proficiency on their test scores. We use these scores to create action plans according to the students' needs 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Tutoring and Department team time 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. This lets us know about the four modalities, in which the student is strong or needs to improve. For example, in our NYSESLAT last year, our scores showed that most of our students needed improvement in writing skills, but made improvements in their reading skills. We are now focusing more on writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Again, teacher team time, and tutoring. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We are delivering the services in Integrated instruction for grades nine and ten in ELA class. We also have the Transitioning and Expanding level in their Science content class. For eleven and twelve we do this in their ELA class. The standalone classes are offered in a double block for the entering and emerging levels every day, with the ninth and tenth grade students together and the 11 th and 12 th grade students together. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Our entering students get 540 minutes a week, through two stand alone units, and one integrated unit. Our emerging students only need 360 minutes, but we provide 540 minutes to those students as well. Our transitioning students receive 180 minutes a week in content and standalone, and our expanding students receive the same but in content only. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We deliever ELA instruction in English, but we do use Native Language supports in the other Core content areas. We use a different strategy and method to reach these students' specific needs. Basically, we do the integetrated model with native language support in ELA and in content area. Also, the ENL teachers support ELLs in the content area, again providing integrated services plus also during tutoring using native language materials and resources. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In our stand alone classes students are asked to write in both English and their native language as assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status For SIFE students, assessments are completed in their native language and in English to determine reading and math abilities. Using this information, an individual plan is created for the student. For our students in the country for less than two years, we encourage students to utilize differentiated instruction and assignments. We offer Spanish books and dictionaries to these students. Indeed, we have a small library for them to help. Newcomers who have been identified as Beginners are provide with 540 minutes a week and classes are differentiated based on skill level. They also received a language labs in order to improve listening and language skills. Last year we purchased the Rosetta Stone. With the classroom students take part in collaborative learning stations, participating in groups of various skill levels. There are also differentiated assignments, based on abilities and skill levels and need (i.e. some students may be asked to write a two paragraph essay, which others may be asked to writ a five paragraph essay, or may choose to present their work in either written or oral form. There are man visuals used at the Beginner level, and realia are also utilized more at the Beginner stage.There are also more cognates, and students can receive extra help before school, after, or during lunch. They are working on Common Core aligned curriculum. For students receiving services for more than six years we offer one on one instruction, in addition to our modifications utilized with our two and four year students. There is an emphasis on reading, writing,a nd vocabulary building, and extra support early morning, after school, and during lunchtimes. Students who are commanding level are still entitled to received services for two years after testing out, including 90 minutes a week of ELL instruction. We differentiate for all our students depending on their needs. SIFE students, for example, might need more time on task, and Emerging students might need more native language support. Testing accommodations for all students, from SIFE to Commanding, are maintained by all members of our school community. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  In order to ensure that ELL SWDs receive all services mandated, our teachers are provided with copies of the students' IEP, which contain short and long term goals. We address all areas of the IEP, including counseling and speech services, and also provide proper scheduling with classes that meet these students' needs. Based on the IEPs, teachers plan their lessons to accommodate our students' learning styles, needs, and goals. Further, our teachers meeting regularly to discuss implementing strategies for the Common Core across all curricula and all-skill levels, and focus on skill-building in reading and writing for all students. Through professional development sessions on ELL and Special Education as well as through meeting time, teachers have discussed and implemented such strategies as scaffolding, vocabulary work, outlining, usng charts and graphs and manipulatives, etc. Additionally, teachers have used different approaches to classic literature, such as a comic-strip version of Romeo and Juliet for lower-level readers, and books-on-tape (with students following along in the texts) for auditory learners. The ELA teachers are working closely as well with the ELL teacher in order to accommodate student native language support. They are also, in conjunction, with the ELL teacher, using different tools to align to the Common Core. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses common meeting time for our teachers to approach ELL students with IEPs, and we outfit as mandated, ICT classes with multiple teachers. Additionally, we have linked up with the UTR program at New Visions in order to get even more support for our students. The students have classes everyday with general education students in physical education, ICT classes, and tutoring. We also have all students participate in field work and trips. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention program for ELLs in the area of ELA and Social Studies involves as many of the following as our ELL students need: books provided in Spanish that match what students are currently reading in their ELA and Social Studies classes, dictionaries, graphic novels, books on tape, Newsela, use of graphic organizes, tutoring, and targeted one on one assistance with writing. In the area of Math, our ELL students receive additional tutoring as needed, and differentiated assignments on an as-needed basis. In Science, our ELLs have the use of dictionaries and graphic organizers, reference guides, and lab books in native languages which we provide, and tutoring. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In our dedicated ELL room, a brand new Smartboard was added in addition to a computer cart. We are now using the Rosetta Stone, and we have added the Spanish Club and the Multicultural Club (and Multicultural Night!) to encourage more appreciation of ELL students and their cuitures. Additionally, we added Advance Placement Spanish, and have a Spanish Honor Society. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students have equal access to all school programs. ELLs can take advantage of our before or after school tutorial and Law and Finance academies. Success for our ELL students also increases as they become exposed to the unique and outstanding programs that we offer here. We have an actual courtroom and participate in Moot Court and Mock Trial competitions. We have a financial room with a trading floor. We offer trips to college and other places in New York, and also have an outstanding mentoring and internship programs. All this in addition to clubs, activities, and sports 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ELL classes utilize instructional materials specifically designed to prepare fo the NYSELAT examination. Technology is used to support our ELLs--they have Smartboards in every room, including the ELL classroom, laptop carts, and they also use Rosetta Stone and Newsela. We use native language materials to help support students with their grasp of the content, such as a Spanish version of the English novel "Speak," and we also emphasize vocabulary for all content classes so that the students are more confident in their content classes. Also, a Spanish library is available in the ESL classes which includes novels, short stories, anthologies., etc. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our ELL Coordinator and teacher, Ms. Ana Sanchez, is bilingual in English and Spanish and gives native language support wile in class and in testing, as does teacher Emmanuel Perez. We currently have a classroom library with Spanish literature books, and all ELL students are provided with Spanish/English dictionaries which they may use in their content classes. Additionally, many of our teachers are fluent in Spanish and they provide native language support as well. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources correspond to the ELL students' ages and grade levels. Grade level is determined through using 8th grade reading and math. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are looking into common professional development and PLCs. Additionally, we are willing to assist other schools' ENL students if they need additional ENL time and if that does not fit in to their regular school day at the otehr school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have an orientation for our ELLs and their families. We also host a summer program with learning and also visiting sites in New York City to build familiarity with their new home and comfortability with their peers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Latin, AP Spanish Language, AP Spanish Literature 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Ou ELL Coordinator, Ms. Ana Sanchez, attends many Professional Development sessions during the summer and the year, such as a five day workshop on Common Core and Native Lanugage Arts. This was very helpful because most of our ELL students are Latino, and there were strategies on using the Common Core shifts and alignment using both versions of the Common Core. She also takes part in a number of PD sessions through the UFT, our Region, New Visions, etc. She also recently went to a two-day workshop on SIFE. Another workshop, Writing to Learn, supported the results of our assessment where students needed to focus more on writing. She then turnkeys this information to our staff. These workshops happen twice a semester, in addition to at the beginning of the year, and over the summer.We meet the minimum hours of training through this, and our ELL Coordinator has also attended separate Special Education workshops through the Region. We share NYSESLAT data and modifications with our teachers, as well as Common Core workshops which can be used to help our ELLs get acquainted with Common Core requirements. We make sure too that all members of our school community are also receiving regular ELL professional development. We have sessions both in the school and outside for our Assistant Principals, teachers, paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselors, and our Parent Coordinator. Even our Principal has attended Professional Development regard the school's ELL population. Our ELL teachers participate in a number of off site PD opportunities, hosted by New Visions and the City on how to best serve our students. Our ELL teachers attend professional development not just on CR154, and on Common Core, but also on how to best serve students who are ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The whole staff tries to get to know these students better, to learn about their culture, preferences and learning styles. They do this in order to make students feel more comfortable in this new environment. We have a number of professional development opportunities so that all our teachers know how to differentiate instruction and how to best meet the needs of our ELL students. We host regular PD instruction for our non-ELL teachers in ELL related areas in order to ensure their competence in working with ELL students. Our ELL teachers take part in a number of PD opportunities off-site in order to support their professional growth and meet this requirement. To meet the CR154 regulation, we make sure that our ELL teachers have 50% of their professional development total hours regarding ELLs, and strategies and methodoloigies. Also, we keep these hours on record, using the format of professional development records, keeping agendas and attendance for those PDs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited to two meetings a year for ELL only information. They are also invited in for individualized conferences to inform them about their ELL child's academic progress. We make sure that once a year we have individual conferences with each parent of ELLs in order to inform them of their child's academic progress. Also, we have an orientation meeting where we make sure that all teachers meet with parents of ELLs. In addition, we make sure that we have translation services, and are honoring the parents' preferred language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. A Parent Coordinator is used to promote parental involvement in our school and provides translation services as needed. In addition, our ELL Coordinator, who does a lot of parent out reach, and our Guidance Counselor are bilingual. They are 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  available to parents during the school day and our Parent Coordinator is also available at night by cell phone. Parent workshops are offered in English and Spanish throughout the school year. Workshops included topics such as curriculum, college, financial aid, and parent rights in the DOE. There are also addiitional separate parent events specifically for the ELL parents, such as an intro to ELL in our school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We have an active Parent ENL class twice a week--Mondays and Tuesdays, which is popular among our ENL parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jessica Goring, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bx School of Law and Finance School DBN: 10x284 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Jessica Goring Title Principal Lisa Coxson Assistant Principal Zoraida Torres Parent Coordinator Ana Sanchez Paula Parra ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Emmanuel Perez/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Aura Burgos Juan Mendez Dr. James Brown Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x284 School Name: The Bronx School of Law and Finance Superintendent: Richard Cintron The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ana Sanchez ENL Coordinator/ENL teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. ATS records, and the RAPL report are used to determine preferred languages in order to ensure proper written and oral translation is provided for homes in which English is not the preferred language. This data is maintained and updated throughout the school year by our pupil personnel secretary and our parent coordinator, in conjunction with our ELL coordinator. Kinvolved, a notification system we use that taps into preferred language reports in ATS, submits all messages in the preferred language. Our RCPL report shows that the vast majority of our non-English speakers are speakers of Spanish, but we have a few students whose families speak Albanian, Urdu, and Arabic. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Albanian Bengali Twi Urdu 304 259 1 3 1 1 53.15 45.28 .17 .52 .17 .17 303 260 1 3 1 1 52.97 45.45 .17 .52 .17 .17 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Letters are given to our Spanish fluent Parent Coordinator for her translation. Parent Coordinator translates Parent Coordinator translates Parent Coordinator translates Parent Coordinator translates Parent Coordinator translates September letter and calendar September November letter December letter February letter April letter May letter November December February April May 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night September, May SLT Every month Open School November, March Parent Association meetings Every month Other as needed interpretation service(s)? All of our meetings (i.e. PA/SLT) and school events are either translated for everyone, or we have individual guides to translate to parents. We translate using an interpreter for all present. Individual students walk with parents to interpret as needed. We translate using an interpreter for all present. Use of either interpreter or individual guide 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Kinvolved or phone messenger, which translates into the language preferred by the parent as per ATS. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We cover this in our opening meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will follow Chancellor's Regulation A-663 by ensuring that all appropriate translated documents are provided to our parents. Specific provisions will be made for parents whose languages are not English or Spanish with DOE provided translations. We access all notification documents for parents via the Translation Unit's web site, and we also use Kinvolved, which translates into preferred languages via ATS preferred language report. We have also coordinated with other schools on campus in order to meet the needs of our other language speakers. When necessary, we use the DOE provided translations and/or translators to communicate with non-English speakers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? parent survey, open meetings, discussions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70 
