2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X298 School Name: ACADEMY OF PUBLIC RELATIONS Principal: AMY ANDINO 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Academy of Public Relations 320700010000 6,7,8 School Number (DBN): 07X298 778 Forest Avenue, Bronx, NY 10456 718-665-8866 718-401-0051 Phone Number: Maria Terracciano Fax: Mterracciano@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Amy Andino-Flohr Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Anika Greene-Blake Sandra Alvarenga Maria Terracciano SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: ElshedaiJones N/A xxxxxx District Information Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: RafaelAlavrez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Avenue, Room 102, Bronx RAlvare4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6500 x1 Phone Number: 718-742-6548 Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY, 10458 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Amy Andino-Flohr Anika Greene-Blake Sandra Deleon-Alvarenga Milagros Bourdon ElshadaiJones Maria Terracciano LeslyMiranda Courtney McMillan Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-P 5 Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Teacher Mrs. Jimenez Inez Vargas Kim Cummings Elizabeth Hernandez Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Signature (Blue Ink) 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of our South Bronx middle-school, the Academy of Public Relations (APR: Aspire | Prepare | Respect), is to encourage all students to ASPIRE to embrace their most ambitious goals and dreams through hard work and perseverance and to PREPARE them for the academic challenges ahead of them with college preparatory curriculum in a culture that teaches RESPECT for oneself and others. Under the umbrella of this mission, teachers at APR implement rigorous, common-core aligned curricula in all core subject areas. In addition to offering a robust curriculum in humanities, math, and science. Due to our students' diverse academic and social/emotional needs, APR's public relations theme and mission are based on a theory of action of pairing students with dedicated counselors. In this positive youth-development support construct, students are guided academically and social/emotionally in order to be positioned to secure eventual high school graduation and college (or other post-high school training program) acceptance. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Academy of Public Relations (APR) is a middle school in the South Bronx where learning is a real world experience. Teachers and parents care beyond education, and students develop a profound sense of purpose. Founded in 2005, the Academy of Public Relations is a New York City Department of Education middle school, encompassing grades six through eight with approximately 300 students. The faculty and staff of APR are dedicated to the proposition that all children can learn and are entitled to do so in a safe and healthy environment that fosters curiosity and healthy self-esteem. APR serves a diverse at-risk, economically challenged population as noted by its demographics: The school consists of 45.45% girls and 54.55% boys. The ELL population is approximately 28.84%, The percentage of students with Individual Educational Plans (IEPs) population is approximately 27.67%. 75.77% of the school's population is Hispanic and approximately 20.55% is African-American. APR offers a variety of robust electives to provide a well-rounded education such as: visual art, health and noted Public Relations, its unique elective, which embodies the core principles of the school's mission: Aspire, Prepare, Respect. In this elective, students explore Common Core-aligned content areas through the lens of presenting information to various audiences with an emphasis on social and holistic communication skills. This work is further supported by our continued strategic collaborations, partnerships and special programs that target academics, literacy, social/emotional support, and effective pedagogy: 1. ASPIRA, an after school program that helps students develop academically and socially, continues to use of art, technology and a STEM infused curriculum to enrich student learning experiences. 2. Achieve Now Academy continues to support student learning with a focus on our highest needs 8th-grade students and holdovers by providing academic, skills-based small group instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  3. MSQI (Middle School Quality Initiative) continues to prepare middle school students for college and career success by building their academic vocabulary. 4. The Learning Partners Program allows our middle school administrators and teachers to observe best practices through inter-visitations at neighboring schools for the purpose of further developing best practices school-wide. 5. STARI (Strategic Adolescence Reading Intervention) continues to support those students who read 2-3 years below grade-level through intensive, customized reading comprehension support strategies. 6. Single Shepherd, a youth-development organization, works with our student community to strengthen student citizenry and character and social/emotional health through and the use of Restorative Justice and student-led mediation or guided thinking. 7. The Marquis Studio continues to offer after-school clubs such as, Latin percussion, Hip Hop dance, film, and Spoken Word poetry slam with students showcasing their creative work in November and in Spoken Word competitions. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our most at-risk student populations are 8th-grade, approaching grade level, general education students, special education students, ENLs, and overage/holdover students. These at-risk students require a significant amount of academic and social/emotional intervention and supplemental support programs. They require targeted assistance with literacy and writing, as well as with math. Many of these students require ongoing guidance support, via Restorative justice, Single Shepards, social workers, and guidance counselors to assist with management of strong feelings, impulse control, and feelings of low self-esteem. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Using the the most recent Quality Review, Middle School Quality Snapshot, and School Quality guide we determined our following: Strengths: Our school culture is a safe and cohesive environment where staff, students, and families feel respected and supported. (1.4) Organizational decisions and the use of resources are effectively aligned to the school-wide goals as evidenced by the improvement in the delivery of instruction and student work products. (1.3) The analysis of the information from curricula-aligned assessments leads to instructional adjustments resulting in targeted academic support for improved student achievement. (2.2) Teachers engage in structured and professional learning communities: content, bilingual, SPED that builds capacity as they facilitate meetings and lend a voice in key decisions that impact on student learning. (4.2) The above findings are further supported by positive responses from the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey:  98% of parents feel that teachers and parents/guardians have trusting relationships and think of each other as partners in educating children.  97% of parents are satisfied with the education that their child has received  97% of teachers agree that the design of instructional programs are done collaboratively.  90% of students feel that they are learning a lot in their classes and that the school is preparing them for the next level or grade.  92% of students feel that there is at least one adult in the school that they can confide in. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  Our additional strengths include the use of literacy and math coaches and consultants to provide additional teacher support, a physical education coach to provide multiple after school sports teams for all of our students, and special parent workshops organized by the Parent Coordinator. as well as the following: Our 2017-2018 Accomplishments Last year our annual student attendance was approximately 92%.   We celebrated a 31% increase of Level 3s and 4s in ELA, based upon the most recent NYS ELA State Exam.  We celebrated a 33% increase of Level 3s and 4s in the Math, based on the most recent NYS Math State Exam.  The most growth the school made was in "making adequate yearly progress" under the sub indicator of students with disabilities as evidenced the Middle Schools Quality Snapshot. Key Areas of Focus: Although performance standards on the state tests in ELA were met with the school receiving the average score of 2.2 out of 4.5, we wish to increase this result for the 2017-2018 school year. In terms of performance on the NYS Math test, the school received a 1.92 out of 4.5, continuing to make math a top priority at APR. As a result, the focus for this school year, also our instructional focus, is ensuring that all teachers incorporate, for all students, multiple entry points into all content area curriculum maps, daily lessons and rigorous learning tasks. In addition, the following areas will receive additional attention:      S.O.P.3.5 - Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. S.O.P.5.5 - The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. S.O.P.4.4 - Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students' varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. S.O.P.2.3 - Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. S.O.P.6.4 - The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X298 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 247 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 26 27 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 90.3% % Reduced Lunch 27.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 76.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.25 3% 37% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 36 44 91.9% 0.4% 27.1% 20.6% 0.4% 0.8% 2 57% 6 4.8% 9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The following are our strengths and priority needs in terms of our teachers implementing a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning (SOP 3.5): Strengths based on data trends noted on the most recent Quality Review:  Each core subject teacher administers pre and post benchmarks at the beginning and end of each unit, in   addition, using the data to create next steps based on student needs Formative Assessment data is used not only for student conferencing but for instructional coach conferencing with teachers to boost student achievement. Interdisciplinary team meetings and professional development take place regularly as per the schedule, which provides time for data inquiry work. Priority Needs based on data trends noted on the most recent Quality Review: 2018-19 SCEP-P 16   Student growth in benchmark data needs to increase with the teacher use of data in real time by using technology to provide immediate feedback to students and or parents.  Teachers need to increase 'point of entry' engagement for all students across all content areas.  Benchmarks and formative assessments need to be administered in non-core classes.  More common assessments in content area departments need to be created and administered.  Stronger protocols for using daily informal assessment to measure student learning and teaching efficacy need to be implemented on a daily basis especially in the areas of math and ELA.  RTI services need to be improved, so that learning data on select students can be used to implement immediate  academic support. Students need to learn how to take more ownership of their learning progress and action plans for self-improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, every teacher will employ a formative assessment strategy 2x in daily lessons utilizing depth of knowledge questions and/or tasks as measured by a 5% growth on overall teacher MOTP weighted scores under Domain 3D. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Research-Based Instructional Programs and Professional Development Programs: Teachers- with an emphasis on all ● Robert Marzano’s book, Formative Assessment & Standards-Based Grading, will be used as guide on how to design and interpret three different types of formative assessments, how to track student progress, and how to assign meaningful grades ● PD on using data to form student groupings (consulting) ● APR Retreat and APR Summer Institute- planning ahead for the 2018-2019 school year ● PD on using technology and the Google school- wide system ● PD Skedula while providing parents access to skedula ● Facilitate professional learning opportunity for teachers on interpreting and utilizing data to make instructional adjustments and customize instruction for students to improve student achievement Administration, Coaches, Consultants Team Leaders June 2018 -August 2019 On-going (weekly content meetings) June 2019 and August 2019 July 2018 August/ Sept. 2018 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  ● Teachers will utilize questioning and discussion techniques to promote higher order thinking and empower students to take ownership of their learning, by PD on rigorous instruction by the AP All Students Students ● Students will participate in academic discourse across contents and become well-versed in discussion norms and incorporating the informal assessment of 'accountable talk' practice into daily conversation Special Populations (SWD/ENL): ● Universal Design for Learning, as well as Specifically Designed Instruction will allow for teachers to use multi-sensory forms of informal and formal assessment for our Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English as a New Language (ENL) students to broaden their ability to use multiple entry points, such as audio; visuals; images; videos; manipulatives; flexible seating; in order to broaden their abilities to use “multiple entry points” for learning. ● The Humanities team will implement new curriculum, ensuring students are college and career ready through the analysis of common core texts through learning loop classrooms, which will provide ongoing assessment tools to assist teachers in informing their instructional planning. ● The math team will continue to implement NTN math curriculum. August 2018 -June 2019 ● APR will remain a Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) school, students will participate in a daily course of STARS, where MSQI is implemented 3 times a year(Sept., Dec./Jan., and Mar./April) ● Based on 2018-2019 Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) data, students may be grouped in specific reading groups, as part of their program from September - June Sept. 2018- May 2019 On-going Sept. 2018 -June Teachers, coaches, team leaders, administration 2019 teachers, coaches, team leaders, administration 2018-19 SCEP-P 19 July2018-August 2018 3times a week-  ● Portal- Castle (Standards Based software program) Sept.2018-June 2019 Mon.,Tues.and Sat. i-Ready reading.math software for ENLs and SWDs, which provides teachers with ongoing assessment data to inform further instructional need. Parental Engagement: and July 2018 On-going Parents ● Monthly Principal’s Luncheon to share school assessment progress ● School Messenger will be used to invite parents to Open School Nights, so that teachers can share assessment data regarding their children's academic progress 3b – Parent and Family Engagement August - June 2019 teachers, coaches, team leaders, administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parental Engagement: Adminstration:  Sends a monthly newsletter to parents explaining the requirements for students in each marking period. ● Monthly Principal’s Luncheon to share school assessment progress ● Skedula will keep parents to interact in real time with teachers and review their child's progress and academic standing ● School Messenger will be used to invite parents to Open School Nights, so that teachers can share assessment data with them regarding their children Teachers:  Parent -Teacher time allocated on Mondays after school to inform parents about students' progress and students expectations.  Quarterly conferences delineating expectations for the quarter and how to achieve a exceptional grade in each class.  At the start of the school year teacher send out syllabuses with various information and academic expectations.  Teacher post grade break down in the classroom and summative assessment dates in the classroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 20   Tax Levy funds will be used in combination with Title 1 funds for parent workshops and monthly principals’ luncheons. Tax Levy funds will also be utilized to purchase software/technology and materials to support instructional strategies indicated above to improve SOP 3.5 (Rigorous Instruction).  NYSTL funds will be utilized (indicated as “other”) to purchase curriculum materials needed to align instruction to CCLS and school goals.  C4E funds will be used to support the instructional coaches who will provide professional development around SOP 3.5 (Rigorous Instruction) and school wide instructional focus. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, all teachers will show a 2% increase on MOTP weighted scores under Domain 3D. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Implementation of feedback on Advance observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on most recent Learning Environment Survey and Principal Performance Feedback, the following are our strengths in the area of social/emotional development and health: Strengths:  88% of students agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe in their classes at their school.  85% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards.  84% of students agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria of their school.  90.1% attendance rate  The school is beginning to address the social-emotional health needs of the students, who reported they feel safe and have multiple supports from adults in the building. As a result of school efforts such as the addition of another social worker and two counselors, suspensions decreased from 205 students in 2014- 15 to 118 in 2015-16. Absenteeism and tardiness have decreased as well, with the attendance rate increasing from 92 percent in 2014-15 to 94 percent in 2015-16. According to school counselors, the goal for 2016-17 is 97 percent. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22   Parents feel the staff and school leaders are accessible and responsive to their needs. The school leader has an open door policy, and families are encouraged to contact staff with concerns.  The school leader has provided additional supports for teachers. For example, the school leader created a system of lead teachers and a leadership development process and hired a full-time literacy coach. The school leader has also scheduled time for teachers to meet by grade level and by department to develop common lesson plans and share best teaching practices. Priority Needs: Increase the number of Level 3s and Level 4s in ELA and Math  Reduce the number of Level 1s in ELA and math   Extra focus on subgroups for remediation  Continuous improvement with the social-emotional status of the school community  Social Justice leader assist in developing a set of three to five mutual specific, measurable, ambitious, results-oriented, and timely (SMART) goals to share with and engage staff and families in a process of empowering students to take responsibility for their own behavior and its impact on the school community.  44% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes do their work when they are supposed to.  40% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities.  43% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes at their school, most students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 30, 2019, the school will develop and implement a peer mentor program through the Peer Group Connection program in order to support sixth graders transition to middle school, as measured by an increase of 10% of 6th grade students who respond positively on the Learning Envionment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018- June 2019 Administrators Teachers Research-Based Instructional Programs and Professional Development Programs: ● Robert Marzano’s book, Formative Assessment & Standards-Based Grading, will be used as guide on how to design and interpret three different types of formative assessments, how to track student progress, and how to assign meaningful grades ● Peer Group Connection retreats for 8th grade Mentors  8th grade PGC daily leadership class which focuses on leadership skills and conflict resolution  Peer Group Retreat for Co-Advisors of Stakeholder Committee  ● PD on using data to form student groupings (consulting) ● APR Retreat and APR Summer Institute- planning ahead for the 2018-2019 school year High Need Students English Language learners Students with disability Teachers ● PD on using technology and the Google school- wide system ● PD Skedule while providing parents access to skedular Administrators ● Professional Development with new Envision curriculum such as in-house math coaching sessions, inter-visitations within the school and to other schools. ● Facilitate professional learning opportunity for teachers on interpreting and utilizing data to make instructional adjustments and customize instruction for students to improve student achievement ● Teachers will utilize questioning and discussion techniques to promote higher order thinking and empower students to take ownership of their learning. Students 2018-19 SCEP-P 24 September 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers All Students Students, Teachers ● Students will participate in academic discourse across contents and become well-versed in discussion norms and incorporating the informal assessment of 'accountable talk' practice into daily conversation Special Populations (SWD/ENL): ● Universal Design for Learning, as well as Specifically Designed Instruction will allow for teachers to use multi-sensory forms of informal and formal assessment for our Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English as a New Language (ENL) students to broaden their ability to use multiple entry points, such as audio; visuals; images; videos; manipulatives; flexible seating; in order to broaden their abilities to use “multiple entry points” for learning. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Guidance Counselor  Parent Coordinator  ASPIRA   Parents will be able to see, in real time, the progress of their child through PupilPath. Single-Shepherd's Counseling Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy funds will be used to support professional development needs as they relate to school-wide goals in the area of SOP 5.5 (Supportive Environment). These funds will include the purchase of instructional materials including but not limited to books, training rate for teachers, per session, registration fees/accommodations for training, uniforms, trophies/pins/medals, school community paraphernalia, incentives, etc. - PTA funds will be used in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulations C-660 and its use to support the identified school wide goals will be decided by the executive board of the PTA and/or the general membership of the PTA. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  By February 2019, using an in house Google survey, 6th grade students will show a 5% increase in student satisfaction with transitions to middle school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In house Google survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. X SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Based on the school' s most recent Learning Environmental Survey, 92% of students agreed or strongly agreed that they see people of many races, ethnicities, cultures, and backgrounds represented in the curriculum.  Based on the school' s most recent Learning Environmental Survey, 91% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that in planning their last instructional unit, they had the resources and tools they needed to include multiple opportunities for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from texts: literary and informational. Priority Needs:  59% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes at their school, most students feel it is important to pay attention in class 2018-19 SCEP-P 27   51% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes at their school, most students feel it is important to pay attention when they are supposed to. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all content department teachers will engage in at least 3 inquiry cycles and measure the impact of each cycle through an analysis of student work using the ATLAS protocol. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Teachers development, and/or systems and structures needed impact Sept.2018- June 2019 Administration Coaches change ● The Collaborative Teacher: Working Together as a Professional Learning Community by many contributors ● ● Model teacher identification ● Peer inter-visitation schedule ● Learning Partners Program ● Liaisons Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Administration Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, Coaches English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH) ● have highly qualified and effective teachers that have met effective or highly effective on observations ● Teacher Driven 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parental Engagement: ● Implementation of web-based programs, such as class Dojo Monthly Principal’s Luncheon to share school assessment progress ● School Messenger will be used to invite parents to Open School Nights, so that teachers can share assessment data with them regarding their children Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy funds will be utilized to support the implementation of the instructional strategies listed in alignment with SOP 4.3 (Collaborative Teachers) including but not limited to instructional materials, professional development, inter-visitations as per the Learning Partners Program (LPP), translations and general supplies. Title I SWP funds will be used to support the parent engagement component of SOP 4.3 (Collaborative Teachers) including but not limited to refreshments, invitations, translators and translated materials. Other funding sources will include funding allocated to the school as a partnering MSQI school under MS Task Force. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the impact of all content area teacher's efforts to improve student outcomes will be reviewed 3 x per year in 6-8 week cycles through Quarterly Conferences with administration. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Samples of student work with specific feedback aligned to rubrics used to improve student outcomes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● As a Professional Learning Community (PLC), school grade teams participate in cross curriculum planning to ensure that students are aware of the relationship between subjects and view learning through the lens of the real world ● Teachers participate in quarterly Principal’s Cafés to voice their opinions, questions and concerns about various topics such as curriculum, behavior, ICT classrooms and student morale. This ensures that all voices are heard and further evolves a community of trust. 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  ● Teachers, staff and administration participate in an annual off-site APR Staff Retreats on the weekend where the upcoming year is discussed and planned collaboratively. Staff examine school-wide quantitative and qualitative data and plan school goals and programs accordingly. Needs: ● Teachers need to provide students with ongoing consistent, timely and meaningful feedback. ● Teachers and administrators need a system for collecting and tracking student and whole-school data for the purposes of progress-monitoring and instructional modification and improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 65% of teachers will agree/strongly agree with the statement "A lot or all teachers at my school are eager to try new ideas" as measured by the 2019 Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Research-Based Instructional Programs Teachers Sept.2018- June 2019 Administration ● Anne Henderson and Karen Mapp’s, National Center For Family and Community schools will be used as a study to understand the impact of school, family, and community on student achievement. ● Craig A. Mertler's, The Data-Driven Classroom: How Do I Use Student Data to Improve My Instruction?, ensuring teachers, how to use data to make well-informed instructional decisions. ● K. Cotton & K. R. Wikelund, “Putting The Pieces Together,” will be used as a tool to explain the best practices in parent involvement in schools in the area of data-monitoring. Needs of Students-Subgroups (SWDs and ELLs) Students ● Academic Intervention Service (AIS) program has been created to support student progress and to build conceptual understanding in math as well as mathematical application of the concepts with its data added to specific teacher data-monitoring systems. In addition to there will also supports in Humanities/ELA. ● Students will be given access to technology in order to track their own learning progress data across content areas. (lab carts in each classroom with chrome books) Research-Based Instructional Programs ● Anne Henderson and Karen Mapp’s, National Center For Family and Community schools will be used as a study to understand the impact of school, family, and community on student achievement data. Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration Teachers Students Teachers August 2018- 2019 Administration Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  ● Craig A. Mertler's, The Data-Driven Classroom: How Do I Use Student Data to Improve My Instruction?, ensuring teachers, how to use data to make well-informed instructional decisions. ● K. Cotton & K. R. Wikelund, “Putting The Pieces Together,” will be used as a tool to explain the best practices in parent involvement in the area of data-monitoring. Needs of Students-Subgroups (SWDs and ELLs) Students ● The school will use SED and ENL data to strategically leverage human and OTPS resources and to make organizational decisions that align with the needs and goals of these subgroups in order to enhance student learning. Students and Parents All students and parents will be informed of the school goals through monthly parent newsletters that will also be posted on the online portal ● Newsletters will be translated to ensure all students and parents will have access to this information ● Students and parents will be invited to train on how to use the online portal for access. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept. 2018-June 2019 ENL Teachers and Bilingual Department Parents Sept.2018- June 2019 Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All parents will be informed of the school goals through monthly parent newsletters and/or bulletins that will be back-packed and also posted on the online portal by either the Parent Coordinator or Principal. ● Newsletters will be translated to ensure all parents have access to this information. ● Parents will be invited to receive training on how to use the online portal for access. The Principal will also address parental understanding of effective leadership strategies during PTA meetings, parent-teacher conferences nights and afternoons, special parent orientation town halls and parent workshops facilitated by the Parent Coordinator and Principal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Title I funds will be used to support parent workshops to promote parent engagement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the administration will monitor teacher perceptions to related school wide initiatives including iReady and iO classrooms as measured by a Google survey to assess implementation of these new ideas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In house Google survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After a review of the environment survey, parent involvement policy, and notes from the parent town hall meeting we determined the following strengths and needs areas: Strengths: ● Parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school ● Parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their child learn Needs: Although all parents and families have been invited into the building to attend workshops, programs, performances, etc., turn-out is generally low. Therefore, the school needs to boost the amount of parental participation in all major school events where families are encouraged to attend. Priority: 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  ● Use and promote technology based communication such as robocalls, class dojo, and pupilpath along with mail service, to ensure parents awareness of school events. In turn, promote dialogue between school and home. ● Remote Systems (PupilPath, Dojo, Google Classroom) in order to provide parents who can not attend in-school events with real-time data and feedback on their child’s progress ● Systems also offer a way for parents to contact their child's teacher and advocate remotely for appropriate support services. These systems are also available in their native language, for clear communication between school and home. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase parent involvement at school events by 15% as measured by attendance information from scheduled events. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-Based Instructional Programs Anne Henderson’s, Beyond The Bake Sale: The Essential Guide To Family-School Partnerships will be used to study the parental involvement needed to strengthen children’s education and to include data communication. Strategies To Address The Needs Of Student Workshops will be offered to parents focusing on how they can assist their children at home with homework and assignments, setting goals both in school and at home with the use of ongoing progress-monitoring data. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration August 2018- June 2019 Teachers Parents Data Specialist Teachers and Parents August 2018- June 2019 Administration Strategies To Promote Stronger Family And Community Teachers  Curriculum Nights- where teachers will introduce the school year to parents as to what their child will be learning and daily protocols and whole school regulations PTA President Administration August 2018- June 2019  Workshops conducted by the parent coordinator and PTA President, informing parents how to interpret data, empowering them to take ownership of their students’ learning Parent Coordinators Sept.2018 Parents Monthly  Incentives offered to parents for attending parent activities--raffles at parents events and rewards to parents who attend frequently. Staggering timing of events and parent teacher conferences to offer more opportunities for parent who work to attend.  Wellness Team interaction with parents, referring available  community services  The percentage of parents who respond "strongly agree" on the Spring 2019 School Learning Environment Survey in all areas requesting parental feedback will increase  Monday afternoons allotted for communication  Parent Workshops Quarterly 2018-19 SCEP-P 38   Translators available Strategies to implement systems for quick feedback to parent on their child’s progress  Office hours will be posted for parents to make appointments with PTA President and Parent Coordinator during the school day for constant communication and for the dissemination of information  Students will maintain data folders that will be used to involve their parents in their education programs and individual academic progress. On-going 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  In addition to our PTA President and Parent Coordinator, parents may make appointment to visit with the school's Community-Based Organizations: Single Shepard and A.S.P.I.R.A, as these agencies provide supplemental support in the areas of student academic and social/emotional development AND family partnerships. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  PTA funds will be used in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulations C-660 and its use to support the identified school wide goals will be decided by the executive board of the PTA and/or the general membership of the PTA.  Title I funds will be used to support Parent Café’s sponsored by the Parent Coordinator, refreshments, printing, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  By February 2019, the parent coordinator will meet with administration to correlate the PAC reports and attendance information from school events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PAC reports and Attendance Sign In sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be 5% growth in the ELA and math median percentiles as determined by the NYS formal math and ELA assessments. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Not applicable Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. Teachers will identify the target group of students identified as being in the bottom third in order to provide these students with extra classroom instruction, A.I.S. (1 or 2 periods a week), Saturday Academy 10:00am – 1:00pm and Achieve Now Academy (ANA)Tuesdays & Thursdays 3:15pm – 5:15pm. Saturday Academy will be offered to all students for both English Language Arts (ELA) and Mathematics for specific identified skills. - Once students are identified, the guidance counselor and/or content area teacher and/or the Parent Coordinator and/or A.S.P.I.R.A. will engage in immediate outreach to parents, alerting them to this compulsory extended learning time program. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  A needs assessment of ELT program will be conducted to ensure alignment between program, student needs, and clear student achievement outcomes. We will then integrate our academic courses and ELT through the use of CCLS aligned curricula in the core academic subject areas and physical education. ASPIRA (partnership with this outside after-school program) will be offered to include Dance, ART, STEM, Sports & Fitness, and Leadership. Athletic clubs including basketball, volleyball, and flag football will be made available to all interested students. This program takes place on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday from 3:30-6:00, and Wednesday from 3:30- 6:00 Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. Administration, teachers, testing coordinator will be held responsible for overseeing and implementing these programs or assessments: Achieve 3000, Degrees of Reading Power scores (DRP), Benchmarks, and other assessment scores for monitoring the progress for the stated goal above. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. From September 2018 to June 2019 DRP Dates: September 2018, January 2019, April 2019 NYC Benchmarks: December 2018, March 2019 Performance task: October 2018, May 2019 Performance series: November 2018, February 2019 New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) May 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Human Resources  Testing Coordinator to manage assessments;  Community liaison to increase collaboration between community Based Organizations or after school programs  ELL Liaison to communicate with district resources and turnkey to ENL and support service staff  LAC (Language access coordinator) designee to provide guidance to bilingual staff and how to monitor parent language needs 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Instructional Resources IO classroom to monitor all assessments; i-Ready to provide multiple access points, which allow students to complete tasks in their instructional level;    Google Classroom to allow multiple entry points  Class DoJo which allows parents to monitor student progress Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Frequent Progress reports will be going home and/or newsletters to parents, quarterly and/or after assessments, showing an increase towards the median growth percentile in ELA and Math mentioned in the annual goal above. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, Teachers will use with fidelity in their classes, i-Ready, iOClassroom and/or Coach Digital will be the tools used to monitor ELT progress. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Lowest 1/3 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction Achieve Now Academy Saturday Academy Mathematics Cusp Student Levels1-2,2-3,3-4 (using .9-.1 range on previousyear state exams) For example, 1.9-2.1 Lowest 1/3 Cusp Student Levels1-2,2-3,3-4 (using .9-.1 range, on previousyear state exams)For example, 1.9-2.1 · Achieve Now Academy ·SaturdayAcademy AIS Pullout Small group instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tuesdays & Thursdays 3:15pm – 5:15pm] 10:00am – 1:00pm Tuesdays & Thursdays 3:15pm – 5:15pm] 10:00am - 1:00pm During the school day (1 to 2 periods a week) from minor subjects. Teachers and Academic Intervention Specialist will pull out students. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Science N/A Social Studies Lowest 1/3 Cusp Student Levels1-2,2-3,3-4 (using .9-.1 range on previousyear state exams) For example, 1.9-2.1 N/A Achieve Now Academy Saturday Academy N/A Small Group Instruction Small group and independent counseling At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Provided by Guidance Counselor Achieve Now Academy Self-awareness through interactive activities, peer-mediation services, transition counseling, (grade to grade and school to school), overage student N/A Tuesdays & Thursdays 3:15pm – 5:15pm] 10:00am - 1:00pm During the school day (1 to 2 periods a week) from minor subjects. Teachers and Academic Intervention Specialist will pull out students. Tuesdays & Thursdays 3:15pm – 5:15pm] Saturday 10:00am – 1:00pm 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 43 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  Transportation: Offer Yellow bus service, if route is available or provide a Metro card to and from school.  Offer school supplies  Provide free school lunch  Use of the Single Sheperds as a resource, parents workshops  Provide these students with dress code  Community Liaisons will collaborate with city agencies to provide support to STH students parents including and not limited to: Healthy Relationships, Immigration, Navigating NYC Department of Education, High school Articulation workshops, etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not applicable, for we are a Title I school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  Not applicable, for we are a Title I school. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable, for we are a Title I school. 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Strategies for providing high-quality professional development sessions that are aligned to the Common Core Standards will include a focus on school-wide vision/mission and core beliefs with an emphasis on: 1. 'Unpacking' the Common Core Learning Standards with all content teachers with an emphasis on literacy and writing anchors 2. Engaging in curriculum-mapping, unit-planning, and daily lesson planning using the Common Core Standards 3. Using the Common Core Standards to guide the writing of yearly, monthly weekly and/or daily learning goals and objectives 4. Using the Common Core Standards to guide teacher understanding of academic rigor and teacher engagement in the writing of HOT (Higher Order Thinking) questions) and other essential and/or guiding questions. 5. Using informal and formal assessment strategies in Common Core Standard-aligned content areas 6. Learning how to differentiate instruction for SWDs and ENLs using the Common Core Learning Standards 7. Implementing the Common Core anchor standards across all content areas to strengthen literacy, writing, language, and listening and speaking skills 8. Learning how to align I.E.P. goals with the Common Core Learning Standards 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  9. Providing students AND families with workshops on the Common Core in order to address concerns and/or misconceptions 10. Using the Common Core to engage in vertical (department) meetings for the purpose of inquiry and content-area planning. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. During teacher inquiry, common-planning, and content meetings, teachers will have the opportunity of creating informal, formal, summative and performance-based assessments aligned with the Common Core Standards, as well as with their own teacher-generated CC project rubrics. Professional development sessions continue to provide teachers with topics on the use of assessments, particularly in the area of Item analysis, which will inform any need for instructional shifts or modifications. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 301,342.00 0 11,200.00 0 2,303,145.00 X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Academy of Public Relations, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community Academy Of Public Relations will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● Building the schools and parents capacity for strong parental involvement in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership between the school, parents and the community to improve student academic achievement. ● Fostering a trusting, caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress by providing notifications/ reports on a timely manner. ● Provide parents with assistance in understanding the state, city, and federal standards, 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  assessments and how to monitor and improve the achievement of their children. ● Provide and share information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in language that parents can understand. ● Allow parents the opportunity to share concerns and options through survey, parent-teacher conferences and one-on-one with administration. ● Parents will be seen in a timely manner when meeting with administration or any staff at the school. The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ●ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ●support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ●provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ●schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ●translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; APR will also host the required Annual Title 1 Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents and children participating in the Title 1 program about the school's Title 1 funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under title 1, part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Educational Act. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Create a welcoming school environment ● Providing parents with training and necessary information on the topics through, PTA meetings, Workshops, Parent Coordinator’s Café, and Principal’s Luncheon. ● Engaging parents in school planning, leadership and meaningful volunteer opportunities. ● The school will provide materials and training such as literacy training and using technology to help parents work with their children to improve their academic achievement. ● Connect families and students to community resources that strengthen and support students learning and social-emotional well- being. ● Provide transportation to enable parents to attend school/district sponsored family events. ● Make homework assignments that require students to discuss with families what they are learning 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  in class. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Academy Of Public Relations , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality, college preparatory instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents of all state and city requirements ● Providing parents with reports on their children’s progress in relation to the high quality curriculum their children are receiving I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; ● Clearly communicate school policies. ● Create volunteer recognition activities such as events, certificates and thank-you cards. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; and advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn; ● Read at least 30 minutes daily at home; ● Give parents all notices and information received by me from the school. 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Data trends observed from NYSESLAT scores up until 2017 exhibited stagnant progress in moving language proficiency levels. While there are outliers in the data trend, such as students with disabilities, the majority of students show a need for remedial services in language skills relating to speaking, listening, reading and writing. In addition, students who did not show growth in this program will have the opportunity to grow academically, particularly with our Humanities curriculum and Home Language Arts curriculum, which now include lessons for the development of the student’s global consciousness and English language acquisition in all four modalities (speaking, listening, reading and writing). This program will not only prepare students for state exams (ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT), but it also strives to cultivate well rounded students. Our HLA program supports our ELLS by providing supplemental instruction in their native language. We have adapted the Santillana curriculum which emphasizes on vocabulary, grammar, spelling, punctuation, high interest, literature, as well as reading and writing activities which develop their reading comprehension, fluency and critical thinking skills. This program runs for the entire school year, 45 minutes per week. Our Saturday Institute will focus on developing English language proficiency, as well as support ELLs with test preparation for the NYSESLAT exams. The program will commence around February 2, 2019 and will run for approximately two months until the NYSESLAT exam begins (i.e. April 1, 2019). The program will be run by at least three teachers who are bilingual certified. We currently have 11 teachers (including 2 ENL) who will each instruct our bilingual students (72 students total) from grades six through eight who scored Entering, Emerging, transitioning, Expanding and Commanding, as well as recent immigrants who have just entered the country and have yet to test. Math- Instruction will be conducted in both languages (60% English, 40% Spanish). The Math teacher will focus on the basic Math skills to serve as a foundation to the skills required for achieving mastery on the state assessments. The students will also build knowledge of academic vocabulary pertaining to Mathematics, and literacy skills to prepare them for the New York State Math Test. Literacy- Instruction will be conducted in both languages (60% English, 40% Spanish) and will slowly reduce instruction in Spanish and increase instruction in English each semester, as the students begin to increase their English language proficiency. The classes will include ELLS from all grade levels (6th, 7th, and 8th). The ESL teachers will focus on active participation in all four modalities of language (speaking, listening, reading and writing), with a focus on literacy, reading strategies, text-based writing activities (with explicit instruction in English grammar). Students will have many opportunities to increase their proficiency and performance through academic discourse and complex writing tasks that connect reading and writing to real world experiences. A bilingual team leader has been designated to oversee the bilingual department and ensure that the HLA pacing is to date and being followed, inventory and distribution of all bilingual 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information materials, facilitate personal development and assign classroom inter-visitations in order to assist new teachers with implementation of curriculum and classroom management. A bilingual compliance coordinator has also been designated to oversee ELL compliance mandates, ELL testing mandates (such as NYSITELL, Lab-R and NYSESLAT), as well as new parent orientation sessions. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Title III program teachers and staff will meet once a week for 45 minutes in order to discuss EDAT data, ELL student performance in all content areas, parent engagement initiatives, as well as strategies to increase English fluency for our long term ELLS. In addition, designated teachers will be invited to monthly ELL Liaison meetings (hosted by Maria Guerrero at various District 7 and 11 schools), which include personal development sessions on: -Use of NYSESLAT Performance Descriptors (PLDs) -Speaking and Writing Progressions to engage students in using academic language -Using instructional strategies to develop student's academic language -Develop and Understanding of Hallmarks 1: Working with engaging texts that feature Big Ideas and Rich Content -Develop and Understanding of Hallmark 2: Advanced literacy -Develop and Understanding of Hallmark 3: Write to build language and knowledge -Develop and Understanding of Hallmark 4: Study a small set of high-utility vocabulary words needed to master language and content -Develop and understanding of Oral Language to Support ELLs -Analyzing data to plan targeted instruction with the Four Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy -Providing frequent interaction opportunities for ELLs to maximize their practice of academic language -Develop knowledge necessary tp utilize the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) (Dates and locations pending) Our Bilingual team leader, Julissa Quinones, has been designated to to attend these meetings and turnkey to our Title III teachers and staff during our weekly meetings. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Our goals include increasing parental involvement among the parents of ELLs and equipping them with effective strategies to help their children meet rigorous academic learning standards. We plan to achieve these goals via the following: • Translation of all communication to parents of our ELLs into their native language • Translation of Humanities curriculum to our ELL students, in order for our parents to assist students at home with homework • Have translators available during Title III parent workshops • Invitations for parents to join PTA and Student Leadership Team (SLT) • Invitations for parents to attend PTA meetings, which are held once per month on Wednesdays from 12:00-1:00pm at our school • Invitations for parents to attend SLT meetings, which are held once per month on Wednesdays from 4:00-4:00pm at our school • Invitations for parents to attend District 7 Community Education Counsel (CEC) Meetings held once per month from 5:00-6:00pm (locations to be determined by Council) • Incorporate online programs such as Class Dojo and Skedula where parents can login to see their child's progress and performance, as well as communicate with the teachers. • Inviting parents to our College Access for All (CA4ALL) program sessions in order to discuss options available for their child(ren). Additionally, they are also invited to our program's college trips, beginning April 2019. These sessions/trips are to be determined as our CA4ALL Vendor coordinates these dates for the upcoming school year. • Movie night held by the 8th grade team for both students and parents to attend in school once per month at our school • Trophy ceremony for students and parents to attend for student athletes May/June 2019 (TBD) at our school • Thanksgiving feast to be held November 21, 2018 from 11:30-3:10pm for students and parents; parents are asked to bring in food to share with students • Parents of ELLs are also provided with opportunities to meet with teachers during parent engagement hours on Mondays, from 3:10 to 4:00pm, in order to meet with teachers and learn about curriculum, as well as their child's progress. Parents will be notified of these activities through robocalls, school postings, mailings and notices given to students to take home. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name Academy of Public Relations Borough Bronx School Number 298 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Amy Andino-Flohr Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lesly Miranda Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Julissa Quinones Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Barry Marks Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent type here Parent Coordinator Josie Santisteban Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 260 2018-19 SCEP-P 64 Total number of ELLs 75 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 28.85%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 10 11 12 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At the Academy of Public Relations, we use a combination of DRP scores and the Fountas and Pinell system to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLS. Running records are conducted once per quarter to measure the progress of any student who scores a value below 45 on their DRP test, which is administered in the fall and at the end of the school year. Based on the data provided by these assessments, we know that over half (about 53%) of the ELL population across all grades and proficiency levels reads below a fourth grade level, below a level M in Fountas and Pinell. This information informs the instructional plan of the Humanities and ESL departments, specifically in regards to determining grouping of students, improving or developing teaching literacy strategies, and building appropriate libraries based on reading comprehension ability for our separate Strategic Reading classes. Humanities and ESL teachers use data such as DRP, Fountas and Pinell, the State ELA exam, NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, and other classroom assessments in order to teach to the student’s zone of proximal development, as well as provide materials that are content and level-appropriate. Also, classroom texts vary in difficulty and language based on student ability, which is determined by NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data, quarterly reading levels, as well as other classroom 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  assessment data. In addition, all of our TBE and some of our ENL program students are using the Achieve 3000 online literacy program, which measures student reading comprehension by Lexile level and provides regular data based on activities and assessments provided within the program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We assess students' literacy levels using DRP and the Fontas and Pinell reading systems three times per year (i.e. Fall, Winter and Spring), as well as Achieve 3000 literacy data, which assesses their reading levels in both English and native languages. This data is then used to modify our curriculum to provide supports necessary to serve and meet the needs of our ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our summative/benchmark assessments include, but are not limited to MOSLs, NYC Performance Tasks, Mid and End-of-Unit Assessments, NYS ELA and MATH Exams, as well as NYSESLAT, ELE, NYSAA and portfolio work. Data collected is entered into our Mastery Connect data tracker, which in allows us to track which students are demonstrating Mastery for specific standards, as well as which students need remediation. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We hold weekly bilingual team meetings, wherein teachers analyze data, discern which students need additional support, and collectively tailor remediation for each student. The bilingual department has created a Master Tracker which shows all of our ELL's proficiency status, as well as the points needed to for students to graduate to the next proficiency level. This tracker is used with our students during 1:1 conferencing, in order to keep them apprised of which section(s) of the NYSESLAT they have shown mastery in, as well as what is needed for them to excel to the next level. Additionally, we embedded NYSESLAT test prep in our curriculum in order to prepare our students for the end of the year assessment. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the most recent testing data available (2016 NYSESLAT), our largest proficiency group is Expanding, with 28 students. Our second largest group is Transitioning, with 24 students. Our third largest is Emerging, with 6 students. Finally, the smallest group is Entering, with 1 student. We have received 9 new students between mid year to end of year, which tested Entering pursuant to the NYSITELL. All 9 students were new to this country. What was revealed by the data patterns was that many of our students, particularly Long Term ELLs and ELL/SWDs, are taking several years to move up one level of proficiency, while some Newcomers, after spending 1-2 years in Entering, are moving up one level per year or skipping levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All data mentioned in question 6, as well as data measured and monitored by Mastery Connect (benchmarks, mid-unit and end of unit assessments) and Achieve3000 (reading comprehension in native language), is extracted, analyzed and presented by our bilingual team in order to inform instruction and provide close intervention to our ELLs. All information is then disseminated through our school's sharing portal (Google Drive), to all teachers in order to ensure proper groupings and modifications are made. Additionally, pursuant to our most recent DRP data (Spring 2017), 55% of our ELLs have shown growth (41 out of 75). Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students in our Freestanding ENL program are grouped by their language proficiency levels. Our ENL coordinator provides students with a unique schedule tailored to their language requirements. Students with a language proficiency level of: Entering receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL minutes per week; and Emerging students 90 minutes of standalone ENL minutes per week. Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding students receive integrated ENL minutes as mandated by Part 154. b. TBE program. If applicable. In the TBE program, standards-based subject matter instruction is provided in the student’s native language with intensive support in ESL. As English proficiency increases, so does the amount of time students are taught in English. English proficiency is accelerated through ESL, ELA, and NLA development. The school’s transitional program of instruction includes: an ESL component designed to develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in English; and content-area instruction in the native language and English designed to teach subject matter to ELLs. Also, English language development is strengthened through participation in English-taught enrichment classes such as technology, dance, and physical education. Teachers use ESL methods to teach content and consider scaffolding instructional strategies. As students develop English language skills, time in the native language decreases. When ELLs reach Commanding (Proficiency) on the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT), they are placed in a monolingual class in English, with ESL services for an additional two years after testing out. TBE programs are predicated on transferring literacy skills from a child’s home language to a child’s second language (English). In TBE programs, students transfer native language skills to English by spending instructional time primarily in the native language before steadily transitioning to English. Our program gradually increases English instruction, using ESL methodology, in academic content areas such as mathematics, science, and social studies. In their first year, TBE students are expected to receive 60 percent of instruction in their native language and 40 percent in English. As a student’s English proficiency increases, more of his or her instructional day is spent learning in English. The percentage of the use of native language can vary depending on the student’s English proficiency level and the nature of the content area. The program provides grade curriculum level content area instruction in the native language and in English in accordance with the CR-Part 154, Aspira Consent Decree, and the Language Allocation Policy of New York City. TBE teachers (both general education and Special Education) allocate English and the students' native language in the following format: • Entering - NLA 75% and English 25% • Emerging - NLA 50% and English 50% • Transitioning- NLA 25% and English 75% • Expanding- NLA 10% and English 90% • Commanding- English 100% In this program, ELLs receive the same rigorous standards-based curriculum as monolingual students and instruction follows the Expeditionary Learning model. The Expeditionary Learning program supports all areas of literacy through the use of extensive leveled classroom libraries and a balanced literacy/math program, which features a ninety-minute block. Lessons include read alouds, pair share, independent reading/writing journals, graphic organizers, skills and guided practice, phonemic awareness, fluency, vocabulary, text comprehension, and writing. In order to challenge our students to use higher order thinking skills, there is a lot of open-ended questioning, accountable talk, non-fiction reading and writing. Some ESL methodologies and strategies are used to carry out the lessons. They include CALLA, TPR, SIOP, scaffolding, visuals, graphic organizers, collaborative learning, modeling, etc. Implementing such practices allows for the development of both basic and inter-personal communication skills (BICS) and cognitive 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  academic language proficiency (CALP). The ELL teacher instructs literature and the English language using ESL methodologies and native language support. In order to make content comprehensible and enrich language development, she presents a plethora of lessons and activities that encourage communication in the classroom and the use of academic vernacular. In addition, the ESL program provides content-based instruction that is aligned to the New York State learning standards. Throughout the various ESL instructional practices and activities, lessons are modeled, contextualized, and scaffolded to maximize learning. Common ESL instructional practices include: • Whole language approach: Language is used in natural ways for a specific purpose in an activity which fosters social interactions. Instruction closely integrates speaking, listening, reading, and writing. • Interdisciplinary learning: An instructional unit is based on a theme built around two or more disciplines. Standards combine context and language learning in meaningful contexts and develop critical thinking skills. Furthermore, the ESL teacher collaboratively works with the bilingual ELA teacher and bilingual Social Studies teacher. • Cooperative learning activities: Students work together in small groups on a time limited task. Students negotiate and exchange knowledge and experiences while making connections with content and language. Programming clusters cohorts of ELLs in the TBE program with the same native language background in subject area classrooms. As a result, students can access content by interacting with each other, despite varying levels of language proficiencies. Teachers organize collaborative tasks that target content and generate interactions in the native language among peers. Tasks are enriched with academic English language development. Also, native language resources (libraries, texts, technology, primary resource materials) available in the classroom are additional resources that can accelerate learning. >>>PROGRAM MODELS<<< In the TBE program, we follow a self-contained model. ELLs are grouped together by grade in a bilingual class for the entire school day and for all content instruction. TBE is offered for special education (self-contained), ICT and general education. Each TBE class receives 2 periods of bilingual Humanities per day and well as 1 period of Freestanding ENL per week, in addition to ESL push-in and pull out services throughout the week. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As mandated in the New York State CR Part 154, the Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction every week, Transitioning and Expanding ELLs are provided with 180 minutes per week of ESL instruction, and Commanding ELLS are provided with 90 minutes every week for two additional years after testing out. The mandated number of instructional minutes is provided by the ESL or bilingual ELA teacher. The organization of staff in the program model described in the previous section ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the TBE program, teachers make several considerations when determining which language is best to teach certain concepts. Teachers consider the intellectual demand of concepts, student familiarity with concepts in the native language or English, and the academic language required for using and mastering concepts. New concepts are typically taught in the native language and reinforcement is done in English. ELLs are given the opportunity to use the typical “language,” or vocabulary, and discuss concepts in their own words in English or their native language. Content area teachers provide grade-level academic work in the student’s native language so that the student maintains academic progress, as well as English to develop academic English language. Furthermore, teachers regularly review student performance data and design units of study that meet the diverse 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  needs of students and target grade-level course standards. In all core subject areas, teachers use a variety of scaffolding and ESL instructional strategies when teaching ELLs. Furthermore, resources used correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All State and Local tests for Math and Science are provided in the students' home language based on student preference and proficiency. Reading comprehension is measured through our Achieve3000 program, which provides literacy in the students' native language and monitors their progress throughout the year. The program adjusts the students' lexile level as the student progresses, and provides a progress report that shows the students' strengths and weaknesses. Achieve3000 provides the students with a unique user name and password that allows students and parents to access and use their account at home. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. SIFE- Students with interrupted formal education (SIFE) receive additional instructional time during the regular school day in the pull-out/push-in Academic Intervention Services (AIS). B. Newcomer- The newcomers (ELLs who have been receiving ESL instruction for no more than 3 years) receive intensive targeted instruction in reading, writing, speaking, and listening in small group settings. This targeted instruction ensures that the ELLs quickly achieve the state-designated grade-level of English-language proficiency. C. Developing-We work with this group of ELLs to improve their English-language skills in all areas, most specifically in reading and writing (areas that this group finds the most challenging according to NYSESLAT data). As a result, they receive targeted instruction in reading and writing with the Milestones curriculum. D. Long Term- The goal for our long-term ELLs (ELLs who have been receiving ESL instruction for at least 6 years) is to reach English-language proficiency by the end of the school year. Instruction is driven by the scholars’ NYSESLAT scores and thus catered to their language needs. Therefore, they receive intensive targeted instruction in reading, writing, speaking, and listening in small group settings, as well as instruction that prepares them for the NYSESLAT. This targeted instruction ensures that the ELLs quickly achieve the state-designated grade-level of English-language proficiency. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs identified as having special needs receive AIS, in addition to their modification needs required by their IEP's. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The IEP goals and English proficiency of ELL-SWDs are attained within the least-restrictive environment recommended on the IEP by way of instructional differentiation techniques, strategies, and activities. Each content area's curriculum map includes a variety of ELL and SWD specific resources in order to provide multiple entry points to struggling students. Scheduling for push-in and pull-out ESL services for ELL-SWDs will be adjusted throughout the school year based on individual student or small group needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs have been implemented at the Academy of Public Relations for ELLs in English-language development, Math and ELA/Humanities. All supplemental services and programs are funded by the school budget, Title III, and other grants. The targeted intervention programs for ELLS in ELA and math include AIS and Targeted Instruction.. AIS is implemented during the school day for all students who scored a level 1 or 2 in the state Math and/or ELA test. These classes consist of less than 15 students, and differentiated instruction is utilized to drive instruction. These programs are offered in English and Spanish. Additionally, an afterschool math intervention program is offered by the Math team, which includes 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  bilingual teachers.This program instructs students in the most foundational concepts and skills in math, such as multiplication and division. It is offered mostly in Spanish, and many newcomers participate in this program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, our goal is to certify all teachers in the TBE program with the Bilingual Extension. Additionally, we would like our staff to be knowledgeable of ESL teaching strategies. As such, we will provide them opportunities to attend professional development focused on this topic. In addition, next year's ELA curriculum will include texts that are sensitive to students culture and identity in light of our growing ELL population. We would like to provide more enrichment programs to our ELLs and their families. We are planning to start a language enrichment program, in which ELLs can participate along side their parents/guardians. Furthermore, we would like to start a program that can assist newcomers in becoming acclimated to New York City. Lastly, we plan to improve our technology program with language relevant software, which will enrich language instruction for all our ELLs. This software includes Rosetta Stone and audio books. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, we are not planning to discontinue any programs or services for ELLs. We feel that our current programs benefit our students, and they simply have to be improved for full efficiency. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access and encouraged to participate in all school programs during and after the school day. School day, after school and supplemental services in which our ELLs are included are: Student government, Senior committee, ASPIRA, Mural painting, Band, Documentary Production, African Dance, Theater, Photography, Spoken word, in addition to a range of athletics including, but not limited to, flag football, baseball, softball, soccer, basketball, and volleyball. The supplemental Aspira program runs throughout the school year, five days a week, from dismissal to 5:30 pm and involves engaging activities that are both physical and academic. Senior committee and Student government are active during the school day, though meetings are held once a week after school. The creative arts clubs are limited time programs, taught by contracted DOE certified experts, with sessions held once or twice a week from dismissal to 5:00, lasting anywhere from 8 weeks to several months, with new programs being added in subsequent quarters or semesters. Athletic programs run seasonally throughout the year, with practices and games held in the afternoons, evenings, and weekends, depending on the season and the sport. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The bilingual department has been furnished with laptops and ipads for our ELL students, in order to assist them with translations, research and supplemental texts. In addition, we have changed our curriculum novels to include novels that our ELL population can access in both English, as well as their native language. Our new curriculum will provide standards-based instruction in reading, writing, listening, and speaking, and will be designed to accelerate the language and literacy growth of our ELLs. ELLs will also have access to the Math curriculum in Spanish, as needed. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language arts development accelerates the literacy gains in both the native language and English, validates the prior knowledge students bring, and bolsters self-esteem. Native language support includes bilingual dictionaries, native language classroom libraries, technology enrichment in the native language, and the buddy system. These resources are available in most classrooms to accelerate learning. Additionally all teachers, many paraprofessionals, guidance counselors and speech therapists who work with students in our TBE program are bilingual in English and Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We use materials and services that are appropriate to our students' grade and age. Students who need additional writing support are provided with technology in order to scaffold the writing process. 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have a summer bridge program, facilitated by several bilingual members of the faculty and staff, that assists newly enrolled 6 th grade ELLs in getting ready for middle school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language electives are offered to our scholars 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As part of the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the Academy of Public Relations, an ENL/literacy consultant will provide monthly workshops that relate to strategies and techniques in teaching ELLs. Additionally, ENL and bilingual teachers will attend ELL liaison meetings that are facilitated by the network. The ESL teacher will also facilitate several Professional Development sessions for teachers of ELLs and related service providers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Monthly professional development workshops and assistance from the ENL teacher will provide support to the staff as they assist ELLs in their transition from elementary to middle school and middle to high school. All services are included in the transition from one school level to another, including assistance with the high school selection process. Mrs. Werner will coordinate efforts with Mrs. Vazquez, the Guidance Counselor, and other related service providers to assist transitioning students in their educational progression. The sessions outlined above will assist teachers in receiving ELL-specific professional development for 15% of total PD hours (for all teachers), or 50% (for Bilingual/ENL teachers). The ENL Coordinator keeps records of ELL training attended by staff inside and outside the school. The records include sign-in sheets and agendas, and they are kept in the school’s ELL Compliance Binder. 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? From April to June, the members of the LPT will schedule annual individual meetings with the parents of ELL students in order to discuss the student's language goals, progress, needs, and assessment results. Spanish interpretation/translations will be provided in-house by staff. For home languages other than Spanish, interpretation/translation services will be provided by the school's outside vendor, The Big Word. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. I. PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT ACTIVITES >>>FALL<<< Principals Brunch PTA meetings SLT meetings Thanksgiving Feast >>>WINTER<<< Principals Brunch PTA meetings SLT meetings ELL Parent Orientation ELL Parent Workshop: How to Foster English-language Development at Home >>>SPRING<<< Principals Brunch PTA meetings SLT meetings ELL Parent Orientation ELL Parent Workshop: ELLs and Test-taking Strategies Mother's Day Brunch >>>SUMMER<<< Principals Brunch PTA meetings SLT meetings ELL Parent Orientation Father's Day Hoops Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  2018-19 SCEP-P 73 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Amy Andino, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 74  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Academy of Public Relations School DBN: 07X298 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Amy Andino-Flohr Title Principal Barry Marks Assistant Principal Josie Santisteban Parent Coordinator Lesly Miranda ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/2017 6/30/2017 6/30/2017 6/30/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 75  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07x298 School Name: Academy of Public Relations Superintendent: Rafael Alvarez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We utilize the Home Language Information Survey, ATS, and Blue Card information to identify the translation and interpretation needs of our community, as well as informal data from one on one conversations between parents, teachers, and the Parent Coordinator. Based on the HLIS and ATS, our school population contains 5 households with indicated home languages of Fulani, Arabic, French, Akan, and Soninke, as well as 80 households indicating a home language of Spanish. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 76 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English (1), Spanish (80), French (4) 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Announcements regarding significant attendance or non-attendance dates or changes in schedule, i.e. half-days, holidays, NYS testing dates, etc. Letters from the principal regarding disciplinary code, building infrastructure issues, new initiatives, etc. ELL and SPED compliance correspondence, After school program information. Quarterly syllabi for ELA, Math, and Science. Permission slips for all activities Parent-teacher conference announcements. Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2018-19 SCEP-P 77  All other school to parent correspondence. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum night- September Parent Teacher conferences- November, March, May Parental Engagement Workshops- Twice monthly, every second and fourth Wednesday afternoon. Phone calls- As required, from the attendance teacher, guidance counselor, classroom teacher, dean, and administrators. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 SCEP-P 78  All parental notification translation and interpretation needs for the APR community are met in-house or through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. All correspondence and announcements are translated in-house by school staff into Spanish, and French translations are requested from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A survey is made available to parents through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit to assess whether or not they are being communicated with effectively in their language of preference. 2018-19 SCEP-P 79 
