2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X299 School Name: ASTOR COLLEGIATE ACADEMY Principal: SANDRA BURGOS 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Astor Collegiate Academy 11x299 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 321100011299 9-12 925 Astor Avenue 718-994-3418 School Number (DBN): 718-944-3638 Fax: Vincent Agostinelli vagostinelli@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Sandra Burgos Douglas Novak Stacy Ann Clarke N/A Donna Dhala Khamille Cheeks Samuel Contaldi Stephanie Gonzalez District Information Geographical District: 11 Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn, N.Y., 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-7518 Phone Number: 718-752-7478 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Affinity FSC: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Executive Director’s Office Address: Brooklyn, NY, 11201 aamorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-395-2246 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sandra Burgos Douglas Novak Stacy Ann Clarke Donna Dhala Khamille Cheeks Samuel Contaldi Rachel Dhala Elaine De LaConcha Soha Hassan *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Student Member/ Student Member/ Student 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kelly Ayala Kushawn Harris Rasha Elashwah Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Astor Collegiate Academy will prepare students to understand, contribute to, and succeed in an ever-changing society. Astor will ensure that all students develop the skills and competencies required to advance as well as lead in this emerging economy. Guided by our core values – community, consistency, perseverance, independence and integrity – Astor is committed to life-long learning and educational innovation. Cultivating these values will encourage personal accountability and engage students as participants in a democratic society and a global collective. Students at Astor will develop intellectual independence through personal experience, collaboration, risk-taking and inquiry. The educational experience at Astor Collegiate Academy appreciates all areas of study with an interdisciplinary curriculum while also addressing the non-traditional dimensions of our students – their social, emotional, and spiritual well-being. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Astor Collegiate Academy opened in September 2003 as a program on the Christopher Columbus Campus in the North East Bronx. In 2004, Astor was introduced as a high school within this campus. The main focus was business and technology. In 2011, its focus changed to science and technology. Students are required to take four years of math & science classes and two years of technology classes. Astor student body consists of 56.78% males and 43.22% females of which 24% are students with IEPs, 40% are ELLs, and 25% are in the bottom third. The ethnic breakdown is as follows; 254 Latinos, 6 American Indian or Alaskan Native, 37 Asian, 3 Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, 145 Black, 62 White, and 1 multi-racial, 8 not reported. In SY 2014-15, faculty and staff collaborated in refining the school’s core values (Community, Consistency, Independence, Integrity and perseverance). The Framework for Great school is embedded in our school culture. We embrace the element of collaboration through our weekly inquiry and department meetings. In the last three years, Astor has established multiple partnerships to promote the science focus and open post-secondary opportunities for all students. Such partnerships are:  CUNY-Lehman College (TRiO, College Now, Summer STEP, Summer STEM)  Albert Einstein Program-STEP  University of Vermont These partnerships support the intellectual growth and development of all students who participate in these programs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  Astor's student population consists of about 25% students with IEPs and 40% ELLs. IEP students need academic supports in all content areas, ELL students need more support in ELA and social studies and overall, students will benefit from differentiated instruction and assessments to meet their learning needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Progress of the Framework for Great Schools have been made in collaborative Teacher teams (4.2, 4.5), Effective School Leadership (2.3) and Strong Family-Community ties.(6.2, 6.5) 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. The SY 2018-2019 master program was redesigned allowing double period blocks in ELA and history classes. In addition, a humanities curriculum was adopted to increase rigor and increase opportunity for deeper student learning of cross-discipline themes and topics. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X299 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 476 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 14 6 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 75 67 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 69.3% % Reduced Lunch 6.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 50.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 86% 80% 75.4% 10.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 96 88 83.5% 4.2% 24.4% 29.8% 7.1% 2.7% 4 4% 6.4 N/A N/A 80% 82% 79.4% 22% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X N/A X N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Analyzing the 2018 Regents Item Skills Analysis for the January exams allowed teachers to revise their instruction to address common areas of deficiencies across the subject areas and revise curricula to meet those needs. 2. The Regents Item Skill Analysis and Regents scores from 2018 exams showed students were not meeting the college readiness metrics. As a result, the ELA and Social Studies teachers have worked in collaboration to revise the common themes, time lines to reinforce mastery of interdisciplinary topics. This year, both departments will revise the use of humanities curricula in 12th to increase and refine college readiness skills. The school will use authentic assessments to evaluate the effectiveness of the collaboration. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order for students to meet college readiness metrics, the mindset of the entire school community must be positively changed. By June 2019, there will be a 4% increase in students meeting the Regents College Readiness metrics in Math and ELA exams and 12th ELA and social studies students will defend their thesis as measured by the successful completion of a capstone project based on college standards. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher collaboration in lesson planning for 12th grade humanities classes Develop inter-disciplinary research topic menu, activities (Writing Monday and "One Book One Astor) and assessments, Teams will share best practices, develop differentiated strategies and share ideas on how to make thinking visible. Teams will also work on building consistent practices across classrooms. ELA and History teachers ELA and History teachers Students with IEPS, ELLS, bottom third Individualized, online learning programs (ALEKS) will be offered in Math support Classes 9th Grade Students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration Peer Collaborative Teacher and Librarian Sped, GE and ELL teachers Sped, GE and ELL teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will participate as evaluators for the thesis presentation fo 12th grade students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per-session, textbooks and computers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17 Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in students meeting the Regents College Readiness metrics in Math and ELA exams and 12th grade students will research and present their thesis statement These results will be used to appropriately modify instruction and curriculum. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Rubrics will be used to measure student progress on citing evidence, within the research paper. Teachers will use the results to re-teach skills and content in areas of deficiency. Interim assessment will also be used to gage student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. - - X - SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Practices and school policies are reviewed as part of the beginning semester lessons. As per last year's disciplinary data, more emotional and social interventions are needed to address student behavior. This year's lessons will be based on the analysis of OORS data. As patterns are noticed, they will be addressed through the advisories, push-in counseling lessons and grade-wide assemblies. In addition, speakers and Peer-mediators will be used to help create a culture of social emotional support. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  To increase student academic outcomes, 90% of students in each cohort will participate in advisory through either a push-in from the school counselors or as a formal semester long class by the end of June 2019. As a result of this support and increased mediation, student incidents reported on OORS will decrease by 3% by June 2019, when compared to SY 2017-2018 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 9th-12th grade students take advisory classes that focus around certain goals by grade: 9th-12th grade 9th grade - Social Emotional Skills, Conflict Resolution Skills, Study Skills, Initial exposure to College and Career, 10th Grade - Character Building, Peer Mediation Skills, College and Career. 11th Grade - Character Building, Research Skills, College and Career. 10th and 12th grade take advisory in the fall term.. 9th and 11th grade take advisory in the spring term 12th Grade - College Seminar. Students with IEPs and ELL's will participate in advisories with their GE peers. 9th-12th grade Throughout the year Weekly and behavioral team meetings to review referrals and observe patterns and trends that have to be addressed through the advisories. 9th-12th grade Throughout the year Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Guidance Counselors, CBO, teachers and administration Guidance Counselors, CBO, teachers and administration Teachers, students, parents, guidance counselors, parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Individual parent conferences will be scheduled, SLT and PA meetings will promote parent involvement. Parents will be invited to participate in advisories as guest speakers and observers. The Parent Coordinator will work in conjunction with the Administration, Advisory Teachers and PTA, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SLT payment 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, student incidents in OORS will be reduced by 1% when compared to SY 2017-18. Monthly review of OORs report and teacher referrals will be conducted. Teachers will receive Professional Development to assist with the facilitation of the advisories and how to mediate student disputes so they do not escalate. Teachers will also be advised on how to incorporate parents into the advisory. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORs reports and referrals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed - - X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to the 2016-17 Quality Review, "there is strong collaborative planning reflected in challenging tasks that encourage higher-order thinking for all." This is a strength because students have access to engaging and rigorous tasks. The curricula builds coherence and culminates in promoting college and career readiness for all. There is a focus for students to not only pass the Math and ELA Regents, but to retake them if they have not achieved a college ready score 2. The priority that will be addressed is the use of questioning, by teachers, to quickly and accurately gage understanding and mastery. Teachers will be given common prep periods and Monday meetings after school to work collaboratively towards this goal. According to the 2016-17 Quality Review, formative assessment was inconsistent in the classrooms. Teachers will develop questioning strategies, which tap into higher order thinking, that can be used throughout a lesson to formative gage student mastery without interrupting the regular flow of a classroom. Teachers will be given coaches, literature, and professional development time to hone in on this skill. Teacher collaboration will increase through peer inter-visitation and weekly team meetings to support and share assess strategies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of the staff will regularly use Culturally Responsive Teaching and Growth Mindsets methodology to improve accessibility, engagement and rigor for all students as measured by a 4% increase in ratings in Domains 2 and 3 in the Danielson framework for Teaching. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Use the books as resources in department meetings, professional developments and grade team meetings. Teachers will be able to observe other strategies that work with different subgroups of students to improve their practice around accessibility, rigor and student engagement. Using Mathematical Mindsets, Mindsets and Culturally Responsive Teaching books, teachers will develop higher order thinking questions to use as daily formative assessments. They will also create rich tasks that are accessible to all types of learners. All teachers All teachers SY 2018-2019 SY 2018-2019 Administration and teachers Administration and teachers All teachers SY 2018-2019 Administration and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops will be scheduled to teaching parents about growth mindsets. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Mandated family nights, parent teacher conferences, parent engagement days, assigning teachers common planning periods built into their work days Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase, when compared to SY 2017-18, in teacher ratings in domains 2 and 3 from the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. January 2019 Regents exams, student artifacts, observation reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). - - - x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Professional Development Committee will create a PD calendar. The Astor Council will be reinstated to study process and modify as needed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. School leaders will identify teachers with strengths in certain areas as a result of classroom observations.. Those teachers will facilitate 80% of targeted workshops in their areas of strength in order to increase staff capacity by June 2019 as measured by a 3% increase in ratings in Domains 2 and 3 in the Danielson framework for Teaching. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create the SY 2018-2019 PD calendar Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The Peer collaborative teacher will provide support target teachers 10th& 11th All teachers SY 2018-2019 PD Committee (teachers and admin) Grade teachers- All teachers -SY 2018-2019 Peer Collaborative Teacher SY 2018-2019 All Teachers - - - -Creating Accessible activities for SWD and ELLs - 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to school activities through google classroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per-session will be available for PD members Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Surveys, walk-through and teacher observations will be analyzed at the end of each marking period to measure success. Areas found to be in need of improvement will the focus of future workshops. By February 2019 there will be a 2% increase in ratings in Domains 2 and 3 in the Danielson framework for Teaching. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Surveys and informal observation reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. - x x - SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school will continue to target workshop topics tailored to parents by different grades, students with IEPs, emotional and behavioral concerns. The school needs to address the English as a New Language community. Data from the School Survey will continue be used to prioritize topics. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The school will refine workshop topics by surveying parents at the beginning of the year to see what topics of interest we should incorporate, giving opportunity for parents to share hobbies with other parents. The school will create a Google classroom updating parents to the events and activities of the school. By June 2019 3% of parents will attend two workshops on supporting their children academically and socially. The Parent Coordinator will work in conjunction with the Community Associates and Administration to plan and facilitate the workshops in order for parents to become better informed so they are better able to partner with us to help students grow academically and social-emotionally. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Create parent survey to elicit workshop topics Provide presenters from multiple agencies to support staff in presenting topics of concerns Parents parents Create Google classroom to relay important information -Parents -Phone Messenger for parental outreach -Parent SY 2018-2019 SY 2018-2019 SY 2018-2019 -SY 2018-2019 Parent Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, key school personnel -Parent Coordinator, Key Personnel -Parent Coordinator PTA President 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Astor Collegiate Academy will partner with TRIO to support parental engagement through workshops, presentations and family field trips. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 1% of the parents will have attended two workshops. The number of workshop and event attendees will be analyzed to determine the types of workshops/events that interest parents most and offerings will be adjusted accordingly. Parents will also be surveyed and asked for input for improvements. This will create a better 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  relationship and connection with the parents, showing them that their opinions also count, with hopes of motivating the parents to want to assist with getting more parents involved. Surveys for Parental Satisfaction will be distributed by February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google forms will be used to analyze attendance and ascertain relevance of topics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day and after-school During the day and after-school small group During the day, after-school and Saturdays Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Freshman and sophomore writing classes, ELA prep classes e-math curriculum, double block algebra 1 and 1.5 of geometry and algebra II instruction, algebra and geometry common core prep classes Living Environment and Earth science curriculum pilot strategies, prep classes Global and US curriculum pilot strategies, Prep classes Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher recommendation, State exam scores and transcript review Teacher recommendation, State exam scores and transcript review Teacher recommendation, State exam scores and transcript review Teacher recommendation, State exam scores and transcript review Guidance intervention, Peer mediation and monthly workshops Small group Guidance curriculum Small group During the day and after-school During the day and after school 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 26 students have been identified of ATS 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Provide basic supplies, small group counseling, assign attendance mentor to monitor daily attendance patterns, record chronic absenteeism if necessary, arrange guidance /parent student conference; encourage academic monitoring by guidance and program target tutoring if needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). - 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  - 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. - 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The hiring committee and administrations will attend New Visions hiring fairs, provide mentors to new and developing teachers, and provide targeted professional development opportunities, offered through Affiinity, New Visions, ISA, NYC Department of Education, and more. When creating the master schedule, assignments will be based, as best as possible, on preference sheets filled out by the teachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Highly qualified teachers have been identified as Model Teachers and have received support to share effective instructional practices by inter-visitation, leading department and grade team meetings and designing professional development activities and workshops. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers will conduct a minimum of two inter-visitations per year, with at least one focusing on how peers use multiple assessment measures on a daily basis. Teacher teams will then meet during Monday PD time to create baseline, benchmark, and final exams, analyze the results to formulate an action plan that targets common student deficiencies. Curriculum will be modified as needed based on the data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 292,064 - 48,131 0 0 0 x - x - - - Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A-E - 5A-E - - - 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,901,028 x 5A-E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Astor Collegiate Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Astor Collegiate Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Astor Collegiate Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Astor Collegiate Academy This school is (check one): DBN: 11X299 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Astor Collegiate Academy is a high school located in the Bronx with a student population of 558 students including 40 English language learners. The predominant language spoken within this group is Spanish. Based on the 2018 NYSESLAT results, 16 ELLs in 9th grade tested in of which 13 students tested expanding and 3 tested emerging. Out of the 16 students in the 10th grade, 1 student tested emerging, 7 transitioning and 8 expanding. In the 11th grade, 2 students tested transitioning and 4 tested expanding. There are 2 students in 12th grade with 1 testing transitioning and the other testing expanding. The success pattern of the students on the NYSESLAT range from emerging to expanding. An analysis of the data from the spring 2018 NYSESLAT results reveals that students scored higher on the listening and speaking sections of the exam. Astor Collegiate Academy’s home language surveys indicate that Freestanding ESL is the trend in program choice by parents. These parents opted out of a Bilingual program in favor of a small learning environment. This program provides instruction in English with native language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Astor Collegiate Academy plans to meet the New York State mandated ESL/ELA requirements through co-teaching instruction in an English class and content area co-teaching in a math class. Consequently, our 40 ELL students receive rigorous language and content area instruction in English and native language support through the use of interpreters, glossaries and bilingual resources. The emerging level students have a dedicated ESL class, the transitioning and expanding level students benefit from team taught classes in English and math with a license core teacher and an ESL licensed teacher. These classes have been incorporated into the schools' schedule. The Freestanding ESL program is taught by a licensed ESL teacher. Additional support is also structured within their core classes as they are taught by content area teachers through the incorporation of various differentiation strategies. These are done by content-area teachers who are abreast with ESL strategies. Apart from teaching his regular stand alone ESL classes, the ESL teacher assists in modifying content area curriculum and resources for ESL students in team taught classes as they provides language acquisition and vocabulary support. The ESL teacher also participates in Grade Inquiry and department meetings and provides instructional strategies to content area teachers for targeted ESL students. All ELL students receive additional content support in our lunch time tutoring program and Saturday State exam prep program. Moreover, it should be recognized that ELLs across grade levels follow a block schedule enabling general education teachers to address ESL needs through integration of language development activities and explanation with content-area instruction, while utilizing other ESL methodologies. Also, writing skills classes are offered to all of our ELLs within the day in which teachers focus on writing strategies necessary for the major Regents exams as they reinforce content. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The school will allocate 100 % of the Title III funds for instructional support in the math and English programs in our tutoring and Saturday programs. The school will also acquire supplemental support instructional materials and resources to facilitate the language acquisition and overall success on State exams. Included are Smart Boards, Aleck, bilingual glossaries and translated textbooks in social studies, science and math. The school's Supplemental Program is providing targeted small group instruction to ELLs with the goal of improving their English proficiency while at the same time addressing their difficulties in social studies, science and math. ELLs will be required to participate in these subjects areas while also focusing on test-taking skills and content learning in small groups. Supplementary instruction is taught by a licensed content area and TESOL licensed teacher. Content area teachers will review, teach and create enrichment activities that will increase students’ understanding of subject matter while helping them to develop writing and critical thinking skills. The TESOL licensed teacher will refine the four language modalities, with great emphasis on writing and reading, (our ELL areas of deficiency) as a means of addressing students' area of academic need. Writing and reading across all content for all students, continue to be this year’s academic focus. These skills were targeted using results of the 2018 NYSESLAT modality report and Regents exams. Students will attend the NYSESLAT and Regents supplementary instruction each semester to become familiar to bolster their language skills and test taking techniques. A new strategy to be implemented this year is to create the opportunity for Spanish-speaking students to be familiar with the Spanish versions of the Regents. This strategy will be used during the Regents prep and after school supplementary program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Despite not allocating Title III funds for professional development, teachers will still benefit from customized PD focusing of strategies for ELLs. These PDs will sensitize and update content area teachers on the following topics: Growing needs of ENL's, Understanding ENLs and ENL Instructional Strategies and Best Practices. These workshops are held during teacher contractual times during extended days. In addition, The ESL teacher participates in numerous professional development workshops. Licensed content area teachers and the TESOL licensed teacher regularly collaborate during grade and department team meetings to discuss challenges ELLs face in content area classes. Grade team meetings focus on targeting low performing students and designing complementary strategies for student improvement. Teachers collaborate during department meetings to share best practices and modify instructional strategies where necessary. Various assessment data are analyzed to identify the areas that the ELLs struggle in. Strategies to meet the needs of ELLs are then discussed. In addition, student work is studied to identify academic concerns and achievements. Such study results are used to develop and implement numerous support systems and strategies that are beneficial to language learners in content area classes. The ESL teacher uses her expertise to develop differentiated lessons that are scaffold for all students in content area classes. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  Part C: Professional Development The ESL Teacher and Administration have and will continue to facilitate professional development that address multiple topics related to English language learners. Such topics include, understanding the ELLs; the ELL identification process; Language Allocation Policy; differences in language and culture; and various ESL methodologies to be used in content area classes. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The success of our students depends on the open communication between our school and home. Parents are strongly encouraged to engage in school activities. In addition, all parents have an Astor email address which gives them access to our Astor parent google classroom in hopes of increasing parent awareness of all school activities. Parent meetings are held twice a year to inform parents of achievements and concerns also to educate parents. Currently listed ELL parent workshop topics are: Understanding transcripts, Preparing for the Regents and Testing out of the NYSESLAT. Projected parent workshop dates are 11/3/2018 and 2/9/2019 between 9:00am and 12:00 PM. They complete a feedback form after each meeting. The results from the feedback are therefore analyzed and used to address parents' suggestions and concerns. Parents receive school information in our most commonly used native language (Spanish) and other native languages spoken by the students and their parents. They are invited to fill-out the school learning environment survey during parent conferences. Phone calls are sent in multiple languages whenever possible. The Translation and Interpretation Unit has been and will continue to be used to translate and interpret any information to our non-English speaking parents and guardians. Parents or guardians are also invited to participate in School Leadership Team and Parent Association meetings. Through these initiatives, Astor is able to evaluate the needs of parents, students and the school. Parental needs and concerns are heard and addressed during the ELL parent meetings and School Leadership Team. Teachers at Astor are required to make at least 10 phone calls to parents to inform them of their children's educational development and behavior. Teachers sometimes send notification letters or emails home. Parents complete a feedback form after each meeting. The ELL and Parent Coordinators in our school always help in organizing and facilitating all the ELL meetings. Parents or guardians are always invited to participate in School Leadership Team and Parent Association meetings. They are always invited to school events including: ELL Parent workshops, ELL Celebrations, Skedula training, and Informational sessions (Periodic assessments, NYSESLAT and NYS Regents). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 00 School Name Astor Collegiate Academy Borough Bronx School Number 299 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sandra Burgos Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sandra Kaplan Teacher/Subject Area Peter Zellen /ELA Teacher/Subject Area Nakita McNeil ESL/Science Related-Service Provider Judith De Jesus Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Gwendolyn Jones Coach type here School Counselor Ethan Insel Parent Parent Coordinator Lisa Cooke Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 485 Total number of ELLs 26 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.36% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Astor uses the NYSITEL in Spanish, ELL Periodic Assessment and teacher-generated placement exams to determine literacy levels in native language and measure language acquisition progress of the new language. Results revealed that the majority of the ELLs whose first language is Spanish are literate in that language (excluding ELLs with IEPs). The other languages are yet to be measured. Assessment of ELL literacy skills will be used to inform new instructional strategies such as scaffolding, lesson entry points, differentiation in student engagement and assessment. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The school has an assessment calendar that is distributed to teachers at the beginning of the school year. Teachers administer baselines and benchmarks, accordingly. The data is then analyzed in grade teams and strategies are developed across the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  curriculum to support the ELLs. Also, in grade teams ELL's student work is examined and protocols are set up to assist with adjustments to instruction according to student academic needs as discovered through the examination of student work and exam, assessment data. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL program is evaluated through students' progress, performance and college and career readiness. Progress means ELLs are acquiring the required number of credits and moving up the English proficiency ladder. School data revealed that ELLs are acquiring the required number of credits. In terms of performance, ELLs performed creditably on the NYSESLAT and core Regents subjects. They are also responding to the college and career readiness by fulfilling their post secondary plans to area community and senior colleges. All these are done with the aim of meeting the AYP and AMAO for the ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures we have in place are ELLs are assigned to enrichment through academic tutoring and Saturday Regents Academy, once data is analyzed and needs are assessed. ELLs are also supported in class through a variety of strategies, including scaffolding, tiered vocabulary, annotation skills and visual aides. Teachers also provide differentiation and multiple access/entry points throughout the lessons for ELL accessibility. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school disseminates the ELL data to all teachers to use in their planning and preparation. At the beginning of the school year teachers of ELLs receive a copy of the NYSESLAT Scores and Regents Examination scores. We then do an item analysis to examine the skills that need to be addressed by the classroom ENL teacher and the content teachers. The ENL teacher and the content teacher work collaboratively to support language acquisition for our ELL students, together they design graphic organizers, lesson plans with differentiation to allow for ELL access. They provide vocabulary support and use DOK to scaffold understanding of content. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to to the 2016 NYSITEL data, one student scored commanding and the other tested beginning and is eligible to take the 2017NYSESLAT. Both students are programmed in accordance with the revised CR Part 154. The 2016 NYSESLAT data shows that that of 26 students who were listed to sit for the NYSESLAT, 5 students tested commanding from beginning; 4 students moved from intermediate to expanding; 1 student tested transitional from beginning, 3 students, transitioning and 1 student moved to expanding from advanced. The predominant movement of ELLs was generally from either Beginning to Commanding or from Intermediate to Expanding. Across grade levels the majority of grade 9 students moved from Beginning to Emerging and 10 th graders from Intermediate to Expanding. Regents data is also used to assign enrichment, prep courses and learning gaps. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ELL teachers and content level teachers examine data during grade team meeting and department meetings to drive instruction, this is done on a bi-weekly basis. Astor also uses the EDAT to provide information for instruction and support for the ELL students. ENL and content teachers co-plan based on test assessments and EDAT Data. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Astor complies with CR Part 154.2 by offering ELLs, based on their respective English proficiency level, a combination of freestanding ENL and Integrated ENL instruction. Based on the 2016 NYSESLAT results, students are identified as EN(1), EM(4), TR(3) AND EX(11). ELLs at Astor benefit from a combination of self-contained(only ninth grade) and collaborative teaching model of instruction. Ninth grade ELLs are programmed in self-contained ESL classes based on their IEP's, NYSITEL and NYSESLAT scores respectively. Entering level students receive three units of study per week including stand alone ENL and ENL/ELA. Emerging level ELLs receive 2 units, Transitioning receive 1 unit; Expanding level ELLs receive 1 unit of ENL Commanding students (.5 unit) continue to receive services for an additional two years. Regents analysis revealed ELLs perform lower than their counterparts due to lack of content vocabulary and poor writing skills. Currently, Astor uses are blocked programming with minor sections for ELLs. ELLs are separated from their general education counterparts in ELA and Spanish. While beginning level ELLs are in their ENL classes, the GE students are in their ELA classes. However, Intermediate and advanced level ELLs differ in that they take ELA with their counterparts but are separated from them during some elective periods. Depending on Spanish language skills, ELLs are also placed in different level of Spanish. Such program ensures that all ELLs receive their mandated ENL instructional number of minutes as revealed from their Lab-R or NYSESLAT. Teachers tap in to prior knowledge and experiences to scaffold instruction. Newcomers are paired with a buddy ENL students or staff member who share same culture and native language to assist in the acclimatization to school life in the U.S. They are also strongly encouraged to participate in the ENL tutoring during day and after-school programs. Notification fliers and letters advising students and parents about the after-school and intervention programs available are distributed and posted around the school in English and students' native languages. Communication in the school is mainly in English and the native languages of the ELLs. Potential Long term ELLs are targeted by the respective grade inquiry team. Their student work are analyized both by licensed TESOL and content area teachers. Needs of improvements are identified during our weekly grade team meeting and strategies are developed and implemented in order improve student outcome and prevent them from becoming long term ELLs. Long term ELLs and SIFE are strongly encouraged to attend day-time and after-school tutoring. To ensure ELL address their academic needs and meet graduation requirements, day-time tutoring has been programmed within day school. Students can take advantage of this program by attending tutoring session during their lunch periods twice a week. In addition, LTE are programmed in a writing skills classes and math applications class to support their ELA/ESL and math applications classes through-out the day. Both LTE and SIFE students participate in the credit recovery program. Special Education ELLs receive services mandated by their Individualized Education Plan. They receive ESL services as stated by their IEPs. Newly English proficient ELLs benefit from the following transition services; testing accommodations for the next two years, day and after-school tutoring, Regents prep classes and Saturday school (if needed). All ELLs benefit from English writing and math applications classes to help them meet AYP in the ELL category in ELA and math. The success of our students depends on the open communication between our school and their homes. Parent meetings are held through-out the year to inform parents of achievements and concerns. Parents receive school information in our most commonly used native language (Spanish). Phone calls are sent in multiple languages whenever possible. The Translation and Interpretation Unit has been and will continue to be used to translate and interpret any information to our non-English speaking parents and guardians. Parents/ guardians are also invited to participate in School Leadership Team and Parent Association meetings. Through-out these out-reach and teams, Astor is able to evaluate the needs of parents, their students and the school. In house, professional development has been and will continue to be provided for content area teachers teaching 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  ELLs. These teachers are strongly encouraged to attend workshops related to ELL strategies and techniques offered by the NYC Department of Education and outside agencies. Content area teachers who teach ELLs have been and will continue to be strongly encouraged to obtain an ENL extension license. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELLs attending Astor Collegiate Academy are programmed based on language proficiency. Language proficiency is determined using the LAB-R or NYSESLAT results. Students are programmed for their appropriate minutes as mandated in CR Part-154. Astor offers a Freestanding ESL program where beginning level students receive 540 minutes of ENL instruction, emerging, 360 mins; Transitioning, 180 mins; expanding, 180 mins and Commanding, .5 units of study per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Astor complies with CR Part 154.2 by offering ELLs, based on their respective English proficiency level, a combination of freestanding ENL and Integrated ENL instruction. Based on the 2015 NYSESLAT results, students are identified as EN(1), EM(4), TR(3) AND EX(11). ELLs at Astor benefit from a combination of self-contained(only ninth grade) and collaborative teaching model of instruction. Ninth grade ELLs are programmed in self-contained ESL classes based on their IEP's, NYSITEL and NYSESLAT scores respectively. Entering level students receive three units of study per week including stand alone ENL and ENL/ELA. Emerging level ELLs receive 2 units, Transitioning receive 1 unit; Expanding level ELLs receive 1 unit of ENL Commanding students (.5 unit) continue to receive services for an additional two years. Regents analysis revealed ELLs perform lower than their counterparts due to lack of content vocabulary and poor writing skills. Currently, Astor uses are blocked programming with minor sections for ELLs. ELLs are separated from their general education counterparts in ELA and Spanish. While beginning level ELLs are in their ENL classes, the GE students are in their ELA classes. However, Intermediate and advanced level ELLs differ in that they take ELA with their counterparts but are separated from them during some elective periods. Depending on Spanish language skills, ELLs are also placed in different level of Spanish. Such program ensures that all ELLs receive their madated ENL instructional number of minutes as revealed from their Lab-R or NYSESLAT results. 3. Delivery of the core content is guided by the school's instructional focus: LITERACY ACROSS CONTENT AREAS. and the use of common Core instructional strategies such as Socratic Seminars. Academic language is developed in all academic subjects and writing skills are bolstered in our ENL/Introduction to Writing classes. As a result, intermediate and advanced level ELLs participate in a writing skills class to support academic writing in all classes. Technical and academic terms are also an integral part of vocabulary building. Emphasis is placed on tier words in each subject to better develop writing pieces. Both vocabulary and writing structures are used to describe features and systems of subjects within an ENL and ENL content area class. As a result, intermediate and advanced level ELLs participate in intensive reading and writing skills classes to improve their reading and academic skills. Technical and academic terms are also an integral part of vocabulary building. Consequently, emphasis is placed on tier words in each subject to better develop writing pieces. Both vocabulary and writing structures are used to describe features and systems of subjects within an ENL and ENL content area class. Teachers tap into prior knowledge and experiences to scaffold new materials. Technology is an important part of the ENL curriculum. ELLs increase their academic goals while working at their own pace and level by using various computer programs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  Astor uses the Lab-R in Spanish, ELL Periodic Assessment and teacher-generated placement exams to determine literacy levels in native language and measure language acquisition progress of the second language. Results reveal that the majority of the ELLs whose first language is Spanish are literate in that language (excluding ELLs with IEPs).To support native language, students have been made aware of their rights to practice and take Regents exams in their various native languages. The school uses bilingual and bicultural staff such as Assistant Principals, teachers and others who speak other languages as interpreters in ESL and other content area classes. Additionally, translation dictionaries and gloassaries have been purchased in Albanian, French, Spanish, Twi and Urdu to help make connections between the two languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are supported during school and after school. They receive explicit common core aligned instruction in class and are offered tutoring in the day time and after school. Astor has a book shelf dedicated to SIFE. They participate in credit recovery programs as well. b. Newcomers are paired with buddy ESL students or staff member who share same culture and native language to assist in the acclimatization of school life in the U.S. They are also strongly encouraged to participate in the ENL tutoring during day and after-school programs. Notification flyers and letters advising students and parents about the after-school and intervention programs available are distributed and posted around the school in English and students' native languages. Communication in the school is mainly in English and the native languages of the ELLs. c. Potential Long term ELLs are part of LAP and each grade inquiry team. Their student work are analysized both licensed TESOL and content area teachers. Needs of improvements are identified during our weekly grade team meeting and strategies are developed and implemented in order improve student outcome and prevent them from becoming long term ELLs. d. Long term ELLs are strongly encouraged to attend day-time and after-school tutoring. To ensure they address their academic needs and meet graduation requirements, day-time tutoring has been programmed within day school. Students can take advantage of this program by attending tutoring session during their lunch periods twice a week. In addition, LTE are programmed in a writing skills classes and math applications class to support their ELA/ENL and math applications classes through-out the day. The LTEs also participate in the credit recovery program. e. New English proficient ELLs or the former ELLs as they are called, receive two years of transition services and all the ELL exam aaccommodations. The accommodations include time and half, and the use of bilingual glossaries during exams. Additionally, they benefit from day and after-school tutoring, Regents prep classes and Saturday school (if needed). 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Special Education ELLs receive services mandated by their Individualized Education Plan. They receive ESL services as stated on their IEP. They also take advantage of our day and after-school tutoring, Regents prep classes and Saturday school (if needed). They all benefit from English writing and math applications classes to help them meet AYP in the ELL category in ELA and math. English Languagelearners and ELL-SWDs use a differentiated computer-based program called Empower3000. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? As a small school, scheduling continues to pose challenges; however, the school still strives hard to program ELL-SWDs as mandated in their IEPs and as part of CR-Part 154. As a result, all ELL-SWDs receive all their services in both ESL and special need classes as well core content classes. The ESL teacher participates in annual IEP meetings to provide next steps and strategies to move the students forward. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  ELLs participate in Astor's intervention program during day-school and after-school. ELLs are required to take both pre and post performance test as means of measuring academic growth. Notification flyers and letters advising students and parents about the after-school and intervention programs available are distributed and posted around the school in English and students' native languages. Communication in the school is mainly in English and the native languages of the ELLs. During lunch periods, ELLs who are in danger of falling behind will be invited to meet with a tutor. ELLs who are part of the bottom third of the school will be part of each grade's inquiry team and will be assigned a tutor-mentor who will address his/her learning, social and behavioral needs. They will also attend the Saturday Credit Recovery Program to make up credits. Students will also take ELA, global, US or living environment classes to reinforce what was learned suring the week and to prepare for their Regents exams. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? English Language learners and all other students are now given performance assessment tests (baselines) at the beginning of school year and in the spring (benchmarks) as a measure of student learning. In addition, ELLs will also participate in Castle Learning Online/Achieve 3000 for reinforcement of content area subjects. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have equal access to regular school programs and after school credit programs and tutoring. For example at risk students participate in Saturday Credit Recovery and week day homework help offered by TRIO, a community based organization. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Almost all classrooms are equipped with smart boards for interactive and vivid learning. Additionally, ELLs and SWDs have access to the ACA Resource Room for literacy skill building, regents' prep, Castle Learning, Achieve 300, Newslea, computer programs for content reinforcement and concept mastery and curriculum support education sites. They also use Castle Learning Online for content practice, self-assessment and reinforcement. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Astor uses a stand alone ESL program. This means English is the language of instruction. We therefore use buddies, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. Moreover, the schools uses the bilingual staff as interpreters in the classrooms. We adhere strictly to the mandates of CR-Part 154: Beginners receive-540 mins; Low Intermediate-360 mins; and Advanced receive -180 hours. In addition to the ESL classes, they are also programmed in their appropriate core content classes based on age and grade levels. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We adhere strictly to the mandates of the revised CR-Part 154: Beginners receive-540 mins; Low Intermediate-360 mins; Transitioning - 180 mins; Expanding - 180 mins and Commanding - .5 units per week. In addition to the ESL classes, they are also prgrammed in their approriate core content classes based on age and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Almost all classrooms are equipped with smart boards for interactive and vivid learning. Additionally, ELLs and SWDs have access to the ACA Resource Room for literacy skill building, regents' prep, CastleLearning computer program along with Achieve 3000 for content reinforcement and concept mastery and curriculum support education sites. They also use Castle Learning Online for content practice, self-assessment and reinforcement. Classrooms also have leveled texts to assist with content and language acquisition. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New ELLs are encouraged to participate in the summer Bridge Program, which helps to acclimatize them to the academic culture of the school. Newly admitted students are also shown around the school by either the guidance counselor, parent coordinator or the Assistant Principal. They are assigned to buddies and other staff who will help them settle down in their new environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Astor offers Spanish and Intensive English Writing elective courses. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is on-going throughout the year for all staff working with the ELLs at Astor. This includes the school secretaries, the Assistant Principals, guidance counselors, ENL teachers and all content area teachers. ELL teachers are made to attend various PDs that address literacy and Common Core practices across content areas, notably meeting the literacy needs of ELLs, A2I(math) differentiation techniques and Using Socratic Seminars effectively across classrooms. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN TOPICS: Flexible based on teacher instructional needs TIME: Mondays, 2:38 - 3:38 PM 2. Professional development at Astor is multi-faceted. ESL licensed teachers participate in numerous workshops offered by BETAC, Network , QTEL and the Office of ELLs. They plan with their colleagues during department meetings to incorporate the Common Core Learning Standards in their lessons and also to assist the ELLs as they transition from one level to another. They brainstorm multiple entry points of lessons as they differentiate various levels of student tasks. Teachers also attend multiple workshops offered by the Office of ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. : Middle school students receive the first orientation during the open house activities initiated by the Guidance staff and are further encouraged to attend Astor's Summer Bridge Program as an orientation to school academic culture. School personnel participate in various PDs to ensure that they are informed of the mandated ELL identification process and teachers are kept abreast with the Common Core Learning Standards; best practices used in teaching and identifying ELLs. As a result all teachers and personnel meet the minimum 7.5 hours of ELL professional development. The ELL co-Coordinator who doubles as the ESL teacher is responsible for educating the school about ELLs on topics like "Understanding ELLs". The dually-certified ENL teacher shares shares instructional strategies, such as effective Socratic seminar techniques that help ELLs 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  become proficient in the four modalities of ENL instruction, best practices for co-teaching strategies, language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction and content area instruction for English language learners. The LAP Team members engage staff in power point presentations on ELL demographics and compliance protocols mandated by the revised CR Part 154. PD attendance records and agendas kept on file by the Assistant Principal. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The success of our students depends on the open communication between our school and their homes. The Assistant Principal and the Parent Coordinator will schedule individual parent meeting following the results of the first marking period and the New York City Periodic assessment. Individual parents will meet with the respective Guidance Counselor, ENL Teachers and content area teachers to discuss, the goals of the Program, ELL student language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in the respective content areas. Individual parent meetings are held with the ENL staff, parent coordinator and Administration will share with parents the goals of the program, student progress, assessment results and student needs. the Language and Interpretation Unit will be outreached to ensure that parents are addressed in their preferred language. Parents are also encouraged and invited to cultural celebrations. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents/ guardians are also invited to participate in School Leadership Team and Parent Association meetings and to serve as chaperones during school trips. The Parent Coordinator offers regular workshops to train parents in the use of Skedula and basic computer literacy. Parents are encouraged to come into the schools to visit classrooms and meet with the Principal. The Language and Interpretation Unit is always used where needed to offer translation services to parents in their native language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sandra Burgos, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Astor Collegiate Academy School DBN: 11x299 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sandra Burgos Title Principal Gwendolyn Jones Assistant Principal Lisa Cooke Parent Coordinator Sandra Kaplan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Peter Zellen/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Nikita McNeil/ESL/Science Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ethan Insel School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 06/27/2017 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11x299 School Name: Astor Collegiate Academy Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gwendolyn Jones Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Translation and oral interpretation needs are determined using the home language survey report. Most of our ENL parents speak Spanish. To ensure that Spanish speaking parents are informed about their child’s education, all literature and conferences are translated by the Spanish-bilingual Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, teachers, clerical or school aides. All other language spoken by our ENL families receive oral translations from our teachers, students and other staff members whenever possible. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  Language Spanish,Urdu, Russian,and Arabic Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Student handbook, PSAT and SAT notifications, school calendar, permission forms, parent-teacher conference announcements, city and state assessment announcements, academic notifications 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Teacher Conferences - PTA metings - Grade Team Meeting/Department Meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  Guidance Academic conference - Financial Aid Meeting - Individual student progress conferences 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The campus security desk and the Astor Parent Coordinator's office(main office) will feature welcome posters that tell parents that "We Speak Your LPanguage". The Parent Coodinator notifies parents that interpretation services are available in their preferred language. The Parent Coordinator makes available informative materials to parents on the availability of translation and interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent coordinator outreach meetings, training workshops and parent surveys and parent association meetings will be used to capture parents' input and general feedback on the quality and availability of services for ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66 
