2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X301 School Name: M.S. 301 PAUL L. DUNBAR Principal: HESHAM FARID 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Paul L. Dunbar Middle School for Historical Research & Museum Studies 320800010301 6 th , 7 th , 8th School Number (DBN): 08X301 890 Cauldwell Ave, Bronx, NY 10456 718-585-2950 718-401-2567 Phone Number: Hesham Farid Fax: Email Address: hfarid@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 8 Superintendent’s Office Address: Children's Aid Society Hesham Farid MerodyMejia Isis Peterson Shakeena Brown Juana Rosario na na District Information Dr. Erika Tobia Superintendent: 1230 ZeregaAve, Bronx, NY 10462 ETobia@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-828-6653 Phone Number: 718-828-2760 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx NY 10458 NSaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x X x Name Position and Constituent Group Hesham Farid Isis Peterson Shakeena Brown Sharonda Trotman Merody Mejia Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10  Check if SLT x x x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Juana Rosario Rhoda Baksh Sarangbe Camara Maritza Rivera Evette Valdez Osin Ty Represented CBO Representative, if applicable/ Assistant Principal Staff Parent Parent Parent Parent Staff Parent Parent Parent Parent Signature (Blue Ink) Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group MerodyMejia HeshamFarid Juana Rosario 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Represented Community SchoolDirector, CBO Principal, AdministrativeTeam AssistantPrincipal,AdministrativeTeam Signature (Blue Ink) 11 Signature (Blue Ink) Name Position and Constituent Group Isis Peterson Marcel Johnson Alice Nesbitt Nicole Peay Veronica Roland na na na na na na na Represented UFTand ELA Department Physical Education and Arts Department ELA Department Guidance Team Parent Coordinator na na na na na na na 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Paul L. Dunbar School for Historical Research & Museum Studies is a middle school with 260 students, spanning grades six through eight. The school's demographic population is comprised of 36% Black students, 63% Hispanic students, and the remainder is other. The student body includes 25% ELL students, and 28% students with Individualized Education Plan. Boys account for half of the population, and the attendance rate for the school for the 2017-18 school year was just below 90%, meeting the attendance goal set forth by the Office of Renewal Schools. In the building, 75 out of 260 students are considered chronically absent. The school is located in the Morrisania section of the South Bronx. The school is located in the 16th Congressional District, which is one of the poorest Congressional Districts in the entire United States. Many students and families are linked to multiple subsidies and services in the community, and face an inordinate amount of socioeconomic challenges. As of June 1, 2015, Dunbar has a new principal, promoting a new vision of positive beliefs combined with positive actions, resulting in positive outcomes. He has instilled a new mantra in the school: “Get better every day.” The physical environment has been upgraded tremendously with new paint and furnishings. The administration seeks to increase enrollment. The enrollment is up by approximately 90 students from the 2015-16 school year to the 2016-17 school year. From 2015-16 t0 2018-19, the school has grown from 6 classes to 10 classes. The main partner for Dunbar is Children’s Aid Society, and there will be partnerships with New York Edge for our afterschool, and the New York Historical Society. The curriculum is aligned to Common Core Learning Standard across all subject areas. Dunbar will use Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Units of Study, along with supplementary texts from a variety of sources, along with American Reading Company in English Language Arts. A balanced literacy approach and writer’s workshop model will be employed in the core classes. Teachers will participate in professional development from Teacher’s College to support the writing program. Teachers will receive coaching from a consultant from American Reading Company. The 100 Book Challenge and the Independent Reading Literacy Assessment from American Reading Company will be implemented as a school wide independent reading program daily. Dunbar will use a blend of National Training Network and Engage NY to create problem based learning approach in Math. Teachers will receive coaching and curricular support from an National Training Network consultant. Dunbar will focus on creating multiple entry points to allow for access for all learners. Subgroups (ELLs and SWD's) will be supported by classroom teachers in conjunction with ICT teachers and ESL teachers providing appropriate scaffolds and modification of unit and lesson plans. The classroom should showcase a clear instructional purpose for each lesson, a student centered activity that includes student discourse (i.e. place mat activity, reciprocal teaching, Socratic seminar, fishbowl, jigsaws), opportunities for students to practice skills in a workshop model, and well thought out checks for understanding such as exit tickets, summaries, and focused questioning. The school's instructional focus for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  the 2017-18 school year is for students to make their thinking visible in writing and discussion; this instructional focus should be evident in unit plans, lesson plans, and student work artifacts. Consultants and teacher teams will create assessments together in a variety of forms. Assessments per marking period include: a pre and a post test per unit, a performance task, a written piece aligned to TC units of study, and 6-8 formative assessment artifacts (such as open ended problems, on demand writing, vocabulary activities, etc.). Data will be collected from these assessments as well as MOSL assessments and school wide interim assessments and analyzed by teacher teams, consultants, and school leaders to identify trends, gaps and areas where students are struggling. These areas will be targeted in units, lessons and intervention times. The school has partnered with Children’s Aid Society to broaden the scope of supports and opportunities provided to parents to assist them with the various crises and roadblocks that prohibit them and their children from getting the most out of the educational experience. Further opportunities to make the school a central hub for learning and support for the community are anticipated through an expanded partnership with Children’s Aid Society. The infusion of Community Based Organization partners beginning during lunch time, followed by an extended day after school program will create a seamless transition, rather than the feeling that school has ended and after school has started. This seamless transition should also increase the number of students taking full advantage of what the entire school day has to offer. Dunbar Middle School will embed the extended learning time into the school day. The design of the extended learning time first period is focused on providing academics in the form of remediation and test sophistication for struggling students, as well as opportunities for enrichment and acceleration for higher performing students. All students will be using iReady as the primary intervention tool. The students will take the iReady diagnostic test three times a year and will be using the adaptive iReady program to focus on their areas of need. Teachers will also use the lessons designated by the iReady program to work with small groups on specific instructional areas. A team of teachers (and Community Base Organization partners) will also be using Great Leaps during the extended learning time first period to address low level readers. Dunbar community teachers will take the lead on planning and delivering instruction. During the 2016-17 school year, Dunbar made significant gains in working toward its goals of improving student performance. Level 1 ELA scores were decrease by 20 percent and Level 1 Math scores were decreased by more than 11 percent. Level 3 and 4 scores also increased by a few percentage points, but the focus will be on improving proficiency levels even further. For the 2017-18 school year Dunbar Middle School looks to continue decreasing the level 1s and most importantly growing the number of students performing proficiently. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X301 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 245 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 26 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 92.2% % Reduced Lunch 26.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 57.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 14.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 36 35 89.5% 1.6% 25.3% 40.8% 0.0% 0.4% 4 29% 8.4 10.4% 11% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X na na Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? -The strengths and needs referenced were discussed during the 2017-18 Quality Review, Receivership Progress Monitoring Visits from NYS, Principal Performance Observations, Office of Renewal Schools visits and progress monitoring with Director of School Renewal. -As per the 2017 NYS exams, the percentage of students scoring at level 1 are 56 (ELA) and 70 (Math) and at level 3 & 4 are 8 (ELA) and 5 (Math) -As per the iReady diagnostic assessments: at the beginning of the year in ELA, 16% of the students were performing on grade level or 1 grade level below. At the end of year in ELA, 30% of the students were performing on grade level or 1 grade level below; this was a 14% increase. -As per the iReady diagnostic assessments: at the beginning of the year in Math, 22% of the students were performing on grade level or 1 grade level below. At the end of year in Math, 44% of the students were performing on grade level or 1 grade level below; this was a 14% increase.-Unit plans are aligned to the CCLS in all subject areas. -In May 2018, the school received a Proficient rating in indicators 1.1, 1.2, and 2.2, which constitute the instructional core. -A system for tracking individual student data and performance on required assessments is being used in every classroom and is transparent to all students. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  -The use of formative data during lessons (checks for understanding with adjustments), during activities (feedback aligned to rubrics/checklists that can improve student performance and target individual learning needs) and during units (informing teachers towards trends, areas of strength and areas of weakness to determine logical sequencing of lessons) has been a focus of PD and observations throughout the second half of the school year. The use of formative data continues to develop. -Lesson planning continues to develop. Teachers need to create clear and specific instructional purposes (learning targets, teaching points), followed by opportunities for group work, independent practice, and guided practice in their lesson plans. -Questioning will be a focus during lessons. Teachers need to pre plan questions focusing Depths Of Knowledge (DOK) level 3 and 4. Turn and talk will be the primary discussion style during lessons. -Conferencing with individual students or small groups of students will be a focus. Teachers will have a system keeping conferencing notes to track student progress across subject areas. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? The instructional focus for the 2018-19 school year is: If we implement a workshop model that includes targeted small group instruction, visible thinking and well designed learning tasks then all students will be intellectually engaged evidenced through writing and discussion. . All unit plans and many lesson plans should create and model opportunities for students to exhibit this instructional focus. Teachers will be receiving professional development in strategies for making thinking visible throughout the school year from administrators and consultants. Some of these strategies include annotating fiction and non fiction texts, using the SOLVE method in math, reflecting on the forever factors in SS, engaging in regular turn and talks, verbal and written explanations of answers, and making claims and counterclaims with support. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? 1. Dunbar MS will use research based CCLS aligned curricula in all subject areas: ELA will use Teachers College units of study in reading and writing; Math will primarily use NTN and some EngageNY ; Science will use Project Based Inquiry Science (PBISci) units; Social Studies will use the Passport for SS core curriculum provided by NYC. 2. Teacher teams including Special Needs teachers and ENL teachers will use student achievement data, IEPs, student work, and data from formative assessments to make modifications to the lessons and unit plans to meet the needs of Dunbar's diverse learning community. 3. Teachers and teacher teams will provide students with a diverse range of materials that has a real world/culturally relevant context for them (i.e. diverse authors and/or stories with diverse characters that they can relate to). What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? Within content areas, teachers will consistently reinforce college and career ready skills, including note taking, organization and time management. The instructional shifts being focused on are the use of academic vocabulary across subject areas, an increase of non fiction text across subject areas, and the use of text based answers. Dunbar is the 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18  recipient of a College Access Grant which also allows us to partner with colleges and universities to do campus visits and hear from college advisers and students. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Instruction will be delivered using a workshop model. Lessons will have a mini-lesson that includes lots of modeling and visible thinking demonstrated by the teacher, an active engagement where teacher and student do something together, followed by opportunities for students to work in groups and to practice independently. Teachers monitor and check for understanding and make adjustments throughout the lesson. Based on formative assessment data, teachers work with a targeted small group and/or confer with students daily. Lessons should conclude with a summary, journal entry, and/or exit ticket. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers create multiple entry points by using translated texts, multiple/supplemental texts, multiple response styles, varied groupings, and various media including video and audio to create more access. Teachers will receive professional development about student learning styles and small group instruction to ensure that they are able to reach students better. Teachers will receive professional development about implementing ICT models to support IEP students in the classroom setting. Teachers will also receive support in developing language objectives in all classrooms to ensure that ENL students have access to content. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Benchmark assessments in ELA and Math (using Ready paper test) will be administered in September and January to measure growth and predict possible state exam performance. iReady diagnostic assessments will be administered online 3 times a year (fall, winter, and spring) to determine progress and make decisions for groupings and remediation. Unit exams will be administered pre and post at the beginning end of every unit to measure mastery of requisite standards. Formative assessment will be ongoing in the form of questioning, conferring, exit tickets, summaries, and red light/green light cards. All the data from these assessments will impact how units are revised as well as inform the formation of intervention groups and what they will focus on. An assessment calendar will be created and revised regularly by the Instructional Leadership Team. The calendar will include dates for the assessment, dates for scoring, dates for uploading to trackers, and dates for looking at the data. The progress will be monitored on several layers including by Administration, DSRs, departments, and ILT. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Ready (paper test) ELA & Math benchmark 6,7,8 iReady Diagnostic (online test) ELA & Math diagnostic, formative 6,7,8 -to measure growth in ELA & Math from the baseline assessment given in September to a midyear assessment given in January -to predict performance on the NYS ELA and Math exams -to measure growth in ELA & Math during the course of the academic year 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  formative, summative 6,7,8 On demand writing assessments baseline and endline (3 assessments) NTN Module assessments (pre and post) formative, summative 6,7,8 Science Predictors (3 times a year) formative, summative 8 -to determine specific areas of strengths and weakness for students to be used for in class grouping, assigning supplemental materials and providing RtI -to predict performance on the NYS ELA and Math exams -the baseline can inform areas to be focused on during instruction, particularly in elaboration and craft for each unit -the endline measures student growth after the unit has been taught and helps to inform intervention groups and focus skills for conferencing -the assessments are directly linked to student facing checklists, which provides an opportunity for self assessment and peer to peer assessment -to predict performance on the writing portion of the NYS ELA exam -the pre assessment provides insight into students' knowledge of pre requisite skills and helps determine pacing -the post assessment measures student achievement after a unit has been completed -provides data to inform the formation of intervention groups -to predict performance on the NYS Math exam -to predict performance on the writing portion of the NYS 8th Grade exam -to determine specific areas of strengths and weakness for students to be used for in class grouping, assigning supplemental materials and providing RtI Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20 By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase of students scoring at levels 3 & 4 on the Ready ELA test as a results of planning targeted small group instruction implemented through workshop model lessons Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average Math proficiency rating performance index on state Math exam performance index on state ELA exam 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Implement an instructional focus that espouses students making their thinking visible in discussion and writing across all subject areas. Unit and lesson plans will be created with multiple opportunities for students to exercise this instructional focus Provide support in ELA planning, implementation and pedagogy with job embedded coaching Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) All teachers, All students September 2018- June 2019 Average math proficiency rating; performance index on math state exam; performance index on ELA state exam Principal, Assistant Principal, all teachers, American Reading Company Consultants, Literacy Consultant, NTN Consultant, UFT Teacher Center coach All teachers, All students performance index on ELA state exam September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, all teachers, American Reading Consultant, and UFT Teacher Center coach -review of student work products -review of teacher lesson and unit plans -review of student performance on standards RI. 1&2, RL. 1&2 when looking at assessments - classroom observations -on demand assessments in writing (baseline & endline) -review of students Reader's notebook with conferring notes -review of students Writer's notebook with conferring notes -monitor teacher performance on formal and informal observations. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22  Implement NTN and Engage NY as the core Math curriculum. Provide support in planning and pedagogy through Consultants and curriculum writers The American Reading Company's 100 Book Challenge program and the use of IRLA (independent reading level assessment) to level all students and encourage independent reading will be reflected in the reader's workshop period daily. The students will be given strategies to focus on based on their reading level to help them move up to the following level. All literacy teachers will receive professional development and in class coaching on how to implement and monitor the program, and all students will engage in independent reading and conferring through the program on a daily basis. Include language objectives across classrooms in order to provide entry All teachers, all students Average math proficiency rating;performance index on math state exam September 2018- June 2019 All teachers, All students performance index on ELA state exam September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, all teachers, -review exit tickets from classes NTN Consultant, UFT Teacher Center coach -review unit exam results to measure student mastery of specific standards Principal, Assistant Principal, all literacy teachers, American Reading Company Consultants -review student reading levels when they are entered in Schoolpace -monitor student reading logs to ensure they are reading independently for the required time -review teacher lesson plans to ensure implementation of guided reading groups with goals based on reading levels performance index on ELA state exam September 2018- June 2019 -observe student conversations in classes ENL, teacher, classroom content teachers, all ENL students 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23 -monitor student reading levels for ENL student -monitor student reading levels for ENL student -monitor student reading levels for ENL student -monitor student reading levels for ENL students Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Needs teachers, Content Teachers, Bronx FSC support personnel -classroom observations perforamannce index on ELA and MAth state exams gof September 2018- June 2019 perfomance index on ELA and Math state exams September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Special Needs teachers, Content Teachers, Bronx FSC support personnel -review IEPS -classroom observations -data talks with students points for ENL students Special needs teachers, content teachers, all students Special needs teachers, IEP students, content teachers Implement 3 consistent Integrated Co Teaching Models : parallel, station, and 1 teach/1 assist in all ICT classrooms Use data from diagnostic and benchmark assessment to align IEP goals with the instructional needs of special needs students 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -A workshop series on independent reading will be delivered quarterly by ELA teachers in conjunction with CBO partners to show parents the importance of reading everyday for 30 minutes, and what kind of questions they can ask their children to promote better comprehension -At the start of every Math module, a parent workshop will be held to expose parents to the requirements of the module and what steps they can take to reinforce the work. -Parent workshops on the effective use of iReady will be held quarterly so that parents can learn how to monitor their child's progress in specific strands -Parents will have access to Skedula to progress monitor their child's performance in all subject areas and communicate with teachers. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  -Monthly Calendar and Newsletter that includes information reqarding current units of studies and strategies to implement at home Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. -Literacy Consultant hired (20 days), American Reading Company Consultant hired (10 days), and an NTN consultant will be hired for Math (20 days) to support teachers -A common planning period is built into the schedule 3-4 times a week for all teachers -Professional development is provided from Teacher’s College for the writing units, beginning during summer 2018 Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, there will be a 4% increase of students scoring at a Level 3 & 4 on the Ready Math Test from the baseline given in September 2018 as a result of planning targeted small group instruction implemented through workshop model lessons Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ready (paper assessment) for ELA and Math Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X na na Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? -The strengths and needs referenced were discussed during the 2017-18 Quality Review, Receivership Progress Monitoring Visits from NYS, Principal Performance Observations, Office of Renewal Schools visits and progress monitoring with Director of School Renewal. -In May 2018, the school received a Proficient rating in indicators 1.4 and 3.4 (area of celebration), which refer to school culture. -The school has a PBIS system posted in every classroom and hallway. The 5Ps (prompt, prepared, productive, polite, positive) will be implemented in every instructional setting and will be used during the extended day program as well. -There will be a Cougar Store where students can claim rewards based on the Cougar Bucks earned. -School leaders promote a message of warmth, support and trust with all stakeholders. -A team comprised of the Guidance Counselor, SAPIS Counselor, School and CBO Social Worker, promote a system of mandated counseling, at risk counseling, conflict mediation, restorative justice, and parental conferences as ways of dealing with conflicts and with behavioral issues. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26  -Data regarding school culture, particularly surveys of students, teachers, and parents is being collected to inform decisions within the school community. It is a goal to increase student voice, teacher voice and parent voice at the school. -Data shows that student attendance has continued to improve over the last 2 years with Dunbar finishing at 90.1 overall attendance for the 2017-18 school year. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? Dunbar Middle School wants to be viewed as a learning institution where all students are physically and cognitively safe. The staff and teachers provide structure and support across classrooms through the implementation of school wide routines, particularly in the areas of entry into class, dismissal from class, and a common flow of lessons. Dunbar Middle School continues to implement the PBIS framework, headed by both the school and CBO staff with the 5 P's (prompt, prepared, productive, polite, positive ) as the centerpiece. A reward and incentive system is built around the 5 P's so that students earn incentives for adhering to the guidelines laid out. The 5 P's will be explicitly taught in September and revisited in the classrooms throughout the year. -In order to create a safe environment and positive climate at the school, a ladder of referral has been implemented. Each grade will have an administrative and counseling point person to deal with discipline and conflict. Teachers and support staff will use Cougar Bucks as a reward tool for the school. -Dunbar Middle School will also explicitly teach social-emotional skills integrating the The Children's Aid Society 's Core Values along with other important skills. We'll be focusing on one particular skill per month. For example, September will be about goal-setting, October will be about perseverance, and so forth. The monthly skill will be posted throughout the school and referred to regularly during announcements, lessons, and supplementary readings. We will have a Student Council in collaboration with the CBO Social Worker and the Community School Director, comprised of students who be vetted during a student based nomination and election process. The Student Council is viewed as student leaders, promoting the vision of Dunbar from the student perspective. -Dunbar Middle School has mandated counseling, at risk counseling, and counseling sessions to resolve conflict. Counselors play an integral part in dealing with behavioral issues. Students exhibiting behavioral difficulties receive counseling as the first line of defense. Counselors also help teachers facilitate parent meetings to discuss correcting behavior difficulties, as well as academic progress. -Dunbar Middle School uses a student survey and interest inventory facilitated by the Children’s Aid Society, to collect data directly from the student population. The survey/inventory gauges students’ feelings regarding their physical and cognitive safety, their relationships with peers/staff, and the interests they care to pursue. This data is collected once per marking period and analyzed to determine trends and problem areas that need to be addressed. Students who have exhibited chronic absenteeism are identified and matched with staff in the building, starting with the Guidance Counselor, SAPIS Worker, Social Worker, and family worker. These staff members, in collaboration with Success Mentors, are responsible for tracking a subset of chronic absentees, developing a relationship with them and their families, and serving as an attendance adviser, helping students create goals and identify hindrances that prevent their daily attendance. This level of attention will help increase the overall attendance rate and cut down chronic absenteeism at Dunbar Middle School. -Dunbar Middle School is partnered with Children’s Aid Society to provide social-emotional supports in the form of additional counseling services. The Children's Aid Society Social Worker will focus on social skills building with a targeted group of students in the school. The Social Worker will also provide whole class lessons based the monthly skill focus. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27  The Children's Aid Society will support in health related services (vision screening, dental services, vaccine opportunities, etc.), mental health (counseling and referrals) and educational opportunities (character development curriculum, sex education, etc.). -Dunbar Middle School has a partnership with the NY Historical Society which led to the school being rebranded as Paul L. Dunbar Middle School for Historical Research & Museum Studies. This partnership also led to the creation of the District 8 Museum at Dunbar, which houses exhibits created by students linked to the SS curriculum. The museum is open to families of students as well as to people in the community to tour, and students serve as the docents. -Dunbar Middle School also has a partnership with Lincoln Center Arts Education called Arts in the Middle. This partnership allows students to express themselves artistically and to be exposed to a variety of arts. Dunbar Middle School and Lincoln Center hold Family Nights, where families get to engage in hands on workshops and see a Lincoln Center performer free of charge. -Dunbar Middle School will have a new partnership with Brain Power Wellness fro 2018-19. This partnership will emphasize focus, mindfulness, conflict resolution, and classroom management. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus The Children's Aid Society Hiring, developing and monitoring Success Mentors, PBIS implementation, mental health, health and educational services Lincoln Center Increase arts integration in the school, hold engaging family nights with engaging workshops and performances How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? Children's Aid Society will help in the creation of the Family Center and technology center. Through PBIS and various events and workshops, families will have the opportunity to celebrate in their student's accomplishments, develop skills and inform families of their student's academic and social emotional progress. The Children's Aid Society can also connect families with resources in and out the school to help service their needs. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, student attendance will be at or above 92% as a result of interventions and supports for students and families through collaboration with school support staff and CBO partners. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28 List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance Rigorous Instruction na 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Community School Director, All staff -increase in attendance -low number of disciplinary incidents Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Implementation of a PBIS system throughout the school with a reward and recognition structure. Monthly assemblies where students are recognized for the 5Ps and attendance. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? All students, All staff Student Attendance Rigorous Instruction On going Sept. 2018-June 2019; Sept is the planning month; Oct we will have the kickoff event; the PBIS team will meet monthly to assess and revise the program; Feb we will plan for a mid year pep rally Student Attendance Sept. 2018-June 2019 -low number of principal and superintendent suspensions Assistant Principals, Community School Director, Guidance Counselor, SAPIS worker, Social Worker, Family Workers, Children’s Aid Society Social Worker Students exhibiting isolated or long term behavioral difficulties Implementation of counseling as the main response to disciplinary referrals. Counselors will advise students about how to make better decisions, set up parent meetings and provide conduct sheets as ways of supporting students’ behavioral issues Implementation of Attendance Data Inquiry Team where attendance and behavior will be review on a weekly basis using the Looking Chronic Absentees, students who generate 407 reports, Student Attendance Sept. 2018-June 2019 (the team will operate with in 6-8 week cycles Community School Director, Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselor, SAPIS Worker, Social Worker, Family Workers, 2018-19 RSCEP-PF -increased overall student attendance -decrease in the number of 30 students with a decrease in attendance Teachers, Success Mentors and move students into and out of targeted groups accordingly) All students Student Attendance Sept. 2018-June 2019 New York Edge Program Director and staff Rigorous Instruction at Data Protocol. The team with be be lead by an Assistant Principal and CSD and includes the Success Mentors, Teachers and school based support team members. They will focus on attendance, decreasing chronic absenteeism and addressing social/emotional issues. As a team, we will decide goals, referrals and interventions for students based on the information from the Heat Map, Class Dojo and Skedula. They will also create thematic activities and programming that can embedded throughout the school day and afterschool. Integration of CBOs into the school day and the creation of a comprehensive after school program in collaboration with New York Edge with tutoring as well as venues of high interest and applied learning such as coding, drama, dance, sports and leadership. students identified as chronically or severely chronically absent -increase in at risk and not at risk students -decrease in incidents -online trackers will be used -review enrollment for the after school program and average daily attendance -increase in assessment performance due to applied learning venues and tutoring provided in after school program 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. -Regular communication regarding student attendance through phone calls, robo calls, Skedula, text messages and emails 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  -Attendance conference with parents to help create action plans for specific student needs to ensure improved attendance -Quarterly attendance celebration events rewarding students with improved attendance as well as their families Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Teachers and students, along with CBOs will participate in an extra hour added to every school day -Children's Aid Society has a social worker on staff for counseling and to support the referral process for students and families in need of outside support -Children's Aid Society provides 3 full time Success Mentors -Partnering with Team First to create Hip Hop Therapy and Mentoring group -Recipient of the Community Schools Grant Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, student attendance will be at or above 90% as a result of creating interventions and supports for students and families through a collaboration with school support staff, success mentors and CBO partners. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance reports from New Visions Data Sorter & Heat Map; ATS reports (daily attendance, 5 days/ 10 days absent, 407s) and Attendance Progress Monitoring Tool, information gathered from Spring Forum, minutes from the weekly attendance team meetings Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X na na na 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? -The strengths and needs referenced were discussed during the 2017-18 Quality Review, Receivership Progress Monitoring Visits from NYS, Principal Performance Observations, Office of Renewal Schools visits and progress monitoring with Director of School Renewal. -In May 2018, the school received Proficient on indicator 4.2 about teacher teams on the Quality Review -The school has a structure built into the schedule to promote teacher collaboration: a common planning period daily for all teachers, used for lesson/unit planning, lesson/unit plan revising, and looking at student work. This has promoted the formation of strong teacher teams and a culture of collaboration in all things instructional. The next step is for teacher teams to become more proficient in making data driven decisions and to become more involved in decisions involving school culture. -The teacher teams will spend more time looking at student work to make instructional decisions. -the teacher teams will spend more time looking at data to create a comprehensive RtI plan. -Teachers are diligent in creating unit plans, lesson plans, and assessments aligned to the CCLS and engage in a collaborative cycle of modifying and revising the unit/lesson plans. -In planning units and lessons teachers make considerations regarding subgroups (ENLs and SWDs),and the practice of providing access for all learners is developing. The ENL program is aligned with ELA in terms of some resources, but more support and development is needed to provide students with the tailored instruction they require (considering 1/3 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 33  of the school population are ENLs). The ICT program continues to develop which model of instruction should be delivered and this is critical considering 1/3 of the school has an IEP. Improving planning and pedagogical techniques that allow for all students and student subgroups to be fully immersed in learning is paramount. -The school continues to strengthen the use of formative data to inform student goals, individual student feedback, and conferencing. -Teacher teams will use rolling agendas and a flipped meeting style in order to maximize time spent together focused on solutions Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? This coming 2018-19 school year Dunbar will promote teacher collaboration in a variety of ways. The schedule is structured in a way that all teachers are available for a common planning time for 3-4 times a week. This common planning time serves two main purposes; first, teachers look at student work samples departmentally and across grade level using the Looking at Student Work Protocol. They identify gaps and trends and use their findings to revise units/lessons for classes/individuals. The teachers focus on making adjustments in three areas: planning, pedagogy, and assessment. They will also look at data during this time to determine RtI instructional needs and continually revise instructional groupings. This leads to the second focus of the common planning time: writing and revising unit and lesson plans departmentally. In an effort to create a consistency across departments, teachers plan lesson as a department, ensuring that lesson plans are detailed and focused on student learning. Teacher teams assess each lesson’s instructional purpose, making sure it is a clear and targeted objective. They assess the activity, making sure it is student centered, problem based, and pushing students’ thinking. They also look for built in checks for understanding, particularly exit tickets or summaries. Teacher teams also ensure that requisite units/lessons exhibit the school wide instructional focus (students will make thinking visible in discussion and writing). How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The instructional cabinet will use protocols to identify a learner centered problem and a problem of practice to improve their own work with teachers and make them better equipped to help teacher teams implement the protocols. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher teams will use protocols to look at data and to look at student work to make adjustments to curriculum and pedagogy. Inter-visitation will also be a critical part of the collaboration among teachers within teacher teams. The inter-visitation will focus on the use of formative assessment during instruction, the use of questioning during instruction and the use of conferencing during instruction. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Team leaders will meet regularly to share progress towards their problems of practice, look for patterns and trends, as well as discuss the implementation of school wide routines and structures. They will also look at student work (using LASW protocol and parts of Data Wise) across subject areas and grades to create a well rounded view of student 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34  performance. The use of rolling agendas will allow folks across the school an opportunity to see what each team is working on. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent iReady Diagnostic assessment (online) -to monitor progress in specific Math strands and identify strengths and weaknesses for each student -to determine groupings and focus skills for intervention conferring notes -to measure student growth following targeted feedback from teachers -to ensure that teachers are giving targeted feedback regularly to students that will lead to their improved performance -to determine students' progress toward achieving mastery of math standards being measured -to determine groupings and power standards for interventions NTN module assessment results Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, all students will increase their overall performance on the NTN Module assessments by an average of 10 percent from the pre to post tests for three units as a result of teacher teams meeting on a weekly basis to look at data, student work and the implementation if an AIS/RtI plan. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve performance index on ELA state exam ELA percent level 2 and above Framework: Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teacher teams will use protocol to determine student centered problems and problems of practice by looking at student work across content and across grade to surface gaps. Content teams engage in collaborative unit and lesson plan writing, focusing on clear instructional purpose, student centered learning opportunities, access for all learners, and checks for understanding. The teams will also collaborate to revise unit and lesson plans based on data. Teacher teams will create and maintain classroom routines that are consistent school wide, including entry and exit routines, flow of the day, notebook Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 ( Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy consultants, NTN consultants, DSRs, lead teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy Consultants, NTN consultants, DSRs, lead teachers All teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers; performance index on ELA state exam; ELA percent level 2 and above Sept. 2018-June 2019 (for math this will occur 4 times awake during common planning periods) All teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy Consultants, NTN Consultants, lead teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teacher teams will submit their action plans they will be implementing to address their problem of practice Review Rolling agendas Observe teacher meetings regularly -lesson plans will be collected and studied to ensure they have all the required pieces -revisions to unit plans will be submitted Observe and provide feedback during implementation of lessons uniform classroom routines will be visible across classes and subject areas 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36  protocol, grading policy, and availability of resources to help students learn. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -A workshop series on independent reading will be delivered quarterly by ELA teachers in conjunction with CBO partners to show parents the importance of reading everyday for 30 minutes, and what kind of questions they can ask their children to promote better comprehension -At the start of every Math module, a parent workshop will be held to expose parents to the requirements of the module and what steps they can take to reinforce the work. -Parent workshops on the effective use of iReady will be held quarterly so that parents can learn how to monitor their child's progress in specific strands -Parents will have access to Skedula to progress monitor their child's performance in all subject areas and communicate with teachers. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -A common planning period is scheduled almost daily for every teacher to participate in teacher teams -Dunbar MS will use protocols for looking at data, including but not limited too, Looking at Student Work Protocol (LASW) and parts adapted from Data Wise -Instructional Leadership Team will identify a school wide problem of practice to focus on -hiring a UFT Teacher Center instructional coach Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37  By February 2019, all students will increase their overall performance on the NTN Module assessments by an average of 10 percent from the pre to post tests on one TBD unit as a result of teacher teams meeting on a weekly basis to look at data, student work and plan together. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NTN Module Assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, SOP(s) Addressed Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). na na X na Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? -The strengths and needs referenced were discussed during the 2017-18 Quality Review, Receivership Progress Monitoring Visits from NYS, Principal Performance Observations, Office of Renewal Schools visits and progress monitoring with Director of School Renewal. -In May 2018, the school received a Proficient in indicators 1.3, 4.1 and 5.1 on the Quality Review. -School leaders conduct frequent formal, informal, and non-evaluative observations and deliver specific feedback designed to improve teacher practice using Danielson’s Framework to inform conversations with teachers. -School leaders use data from observations to tailor individual and staff wide professional development. -School leaders use teacher surveys to determine interest based professional development -School leaders promote a culture of collaboration among teachers and often engage in the work with teachers as colleagues and coaches rather than supervisors. -School leaders will work to increase teacher voice in decision making. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 39  -School leaders implemented a system to monitor school systems and structures and provide feedback to requisite stakeholders, and the follow through continues to develop school year. -School leaders must involve the entire school community in the development and implementation of the RSCEP for 2018-19. -School leaders create a consistent schedule of observation and feedback that is easily tracked and hold themselves accountable for adhering to that schedule (similar to the system espoused in Leverage Leadership, by P. Bambrick-Santoyo). -School leaders will continue to develop their ability to deliver clear and tangible feedback following observations, designed to provide teachers with tools to improve their practice. -The principal communicates with the entire staff weekly through the Dunbar Digest, a newsletter that includes a weekly calendar, highlights, instructional look fors, and action items -The principal holds assistant principals accountable through a Weekly Glance document where they are reminded of instructional look fors, action items, and tracking for their classroom visits -Assistant Principals will develop weekly communications for their respective departments to increase communication and ensure goals/deadlines are met and initiatives are followed. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? -The principal has articulated a vision with several clearly defined points of emphasis to guide the work that takes place in the Dunbar school community. The principal’s vision states positive beliefs combined with positive actions will lead to positive outcomes. The principal also wants the school to focus on preparation, hard work, and a cycle of giving and receiving feedback that is productive. The principal wants everyone to value their time and to value their interactions with each other. -The principal will create an instructional cabinet that meets regularly. The cabinet will consist of the assistant principal, the community school director, the guidance counselor, the DSR and 2 teachers identified as having leadership potential. This cabinet will develop/revise school wide systems, review school wide data, and ensure the ultimate goal of the Framework for Great Schools, Student achievement, is being achieved. This cabinet will also be instrumental in ensuring that the goals of the RSCEP remain in sight and are being achieved. -The principal will work with the assistant principals to create a consistent schedule of observation and feedback that is easily tracked and they will hold themselves accountable for adhering to that schedule (similar to the system espoused in Leverage Leadership, by P. Bambrick-Santoyo). The feedback delivered must be very specific, aligned to Danielson’s Framework for Effective Teaching, an actionable. When delivering the feedback, observers should operate as coaches, helping teachers develop tangible strategies and rehearsing with them. Observers must follow up after the feedback to view how it is being implemented. The data from observations will be used to develop professional development plans for teachers. The PD will align with areas identified as areas that need improvement based on observations. -The principal wants to maintain a data driven instructional environment. Student performance data will be culled by looking at assessments and looking at student work in teacher teams regularly to surface gaps and create/revise future lesson/unit plans. Data charts will be maintained in classrooms to keep performance transparent to students and report cards and progress reports will be sent home quarterly to keep parents informed. The data from observations will also be analyzed and tracked. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40  -The principal desires to create a schedule that blends core instruction with intervention and enrichment opportunities. The principal also seeks to create a schedule where there are opportunities for teachers to work with smaller groups that are arranged by performance level or other pertinent indicators. The principal seeks to purchase programs that will improve student achievement, namely the 100 Book Challenge and the Teacher’s College Writing Units of Study. Dunbar will continue its relationship with NTN, employing a Math consultant for approximately 20 days and a Literacy Consultant for approximately 20 days. These consultants will work on developing lessons, implementing the workshop model, and conferencing among other things. -The principal will have the assistant principals responsible for observing a subset of teachers, programming, school wide safety and discipline, assessments, and leading the math department, among other things. The community school director will be responsible for coordinating school wide programs linked through partnerships with Children’s Aid Society and coordinating school wide attendance initiatives. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? -Distributive leadership: providing instructional cabinet members with opportunities for more ownership of school intitatives, while providng them with coaching and mentoring, and consistent monitoring. This should lead to increased teacher voice, increased investment, and improved overall performance What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? Consistently reiterate the school vision, mission, and instructional focus when meeting with various stakeholders and ensure that the vision, mission, and instructional focus drive decision making and are visible in the classroom and in student work. The Dunbar Digest will continue to be the primary way that the principal communicates with the entire school staff regarding what is happening, what is expected and what is coming up next. -the staff handbook will be a way to clearly define expectations and hold the entire staff accountable with commonality. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Teacher leaders will be a part of the instructional cabinet, and will eventually lead teacher teams meetings using protocols for looking at student work, looking at data, and rolling agendas. Teacher leaders will disseminate the initiatives designed by administrators and consultants after participating in instructional cabinet and lead the implementation. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? -consistently conduct CET, SLT and PA meetings to engage parents with the stakeholders in the school community -partner with CBO to create more opportunities for adult learning, for parents to find out what their students are working on, and to celebrate their students' achievements 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 41  How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Feedback will be to linked professional development, departmental initiatives, staff handbook and discussions with consultants. Feedback will have an expectation of when it should be implemented by feedback will be delivered as soon as possible within a 48 hour time frame. An email to the teacher will follow the feedback session to memorialize the conversation. The evaluative feedback will be recorded in Advance and follow up visits will be conducted to observe / support implementation of feedback. The in the moment feedback will be recorded in an online tracker for all school based administrators to refer to The principal will conduct at least one third of the scheduled observations at Dunbar MS. The school year has been divided into 6 observation cycles with observations generally happening a month apart. Non evaluative observations will also be happening regularly with the expectation the principal visits and delivers feedback to every teacher at least once a month. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Advance rating system to monitor individual as well as school wide progress in Danielson components District 8 TDEC na na na How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? The school will have a 9 period day, 10 periods of ELA and Math a week, common planning time, and staggered teacher schedules Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, on average, teachers will improve 0.25 points on their rating of Danielson components 3B, 3C, and 3D (Questioning and Discussion, Engagement, and Using Assessment in Instruction) as a result of developing collaborative leadership, providing targeted feedback to teachers, and a focus on professional development that improves student outcomes Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42 Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average math proficiency rating performance index on state math exam performance index on state ELA exam 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) School leaders performance index on ELA state exam; performance index on math state exam September 2017- June 2018 Principal, DSR, Superintendent, Talent Coach Dunbar MS will meet the month observation conducted benchmark provided by District 8 TDEC School leaders performance index on math state exam; performance index on ELA state exam September 2017- June 2018 Principal, DSR, Superintendent, Talent Coach -Administrators will review each others feedback regularly -Learning walks will be conducted monthly by all 3 administrators in order to remain calibrated Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. School leaders will create a schedule of observations and a schedule of when feedback will be delivered. Follow up visits will also be scheduled to determine how feedback is being implemented. School leaders will continue to hone their feedback practice ensuring that all feedback is specific and actionable. Feedback will be tied to PD, department initiatives identified in staff handbook and work conducted with consultants. Improved teacher practice ultimately leads to improved student achievement. The administrative cabinet will use strategies from "Tell Me So I Can Hear You," by E. Drago-Severson. and " Collaborative Leadership" by Peter DeWitt 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44 All teachers performance index on ELA state exam; performance index on math state exam September 2017- June 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal Principal, AP n/a September 2017- June 2018 Teachers College, Superintendent and district staff, master principals, APLI Feedback will reflect what has been discussed in PD -Teacher performance, particularly in domains 1E and 3D will be tracked Principal performance and feedback from various visits from including PPOs, QR, visits from OSR, etc. will be reviewed/implemented School leaders will work with teachers to create a professional development plan including identifying goals for specific teachers or groups of teacher. The plan will focus on areas identified through classroom visits, observations and data regarding student achievement. School principal participates in multiple professional development venues and professional learning communities including professional development at Teacher's College, visits with master principals, PLC with District leaders. Assistant Principal will participate in APLI for the 2016-17 school year. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -SLT and PA meeting monthly -Coffee with the Principal scheduled monthly for parents -Parent letter from the principal sent home monthly with a calendar of events Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45  -The principal and 2 Assistant Principals will create a schedule of observation and feedback. -A common planning time is built into the schedule for teacher teams to work together -PD Plan will be created and revised with various consultants based on observations and departmental initiatives, and student achievement data.. Feedback to teachers will be tied to the department initiatives, PD and the discussions with various consultants. -Instructional resources from Teachers College, NTN Math, and American Reading Company will be purchased for all students and teachers -Hiring a UFT Teacher Center instructional coach -Principal will receive Star Factor Coaching -School leaders will hire and work with a Leadership consultant for 20 days Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, on average, teachers will improve 0.10 points on their rating of Danielson components 3B, 3C, and 3D (Questioning and Discussion, Engagement, and Using Assessment in Instruction) from their first observation to their second observation, as a result of timely, meaningful and actionable feedback and focused professional development. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance rating system Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. na na na X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? -The strengths and needs referenced were discussed during the 2017-18 Quality Review, Receivership Progress Monitoring Visits from NYS, Principal Performance Observations, Office of Renewal Schools visits and progress monitoring with Director of School Renewal. -The school does a good job of communicating with parents in regards to report cards, parent teacher conferences, promotion in doubt, and performances/shows. -The school will continue to improve its outreach techniques from just making phone calls on a needs basis to email and phone blasts, newsletters, school website, online grading system and expanding social media presence. -School leaders promote an open door policy allowing parents to have consistent access to administration and teachers. -Increasing parents’ voice in regards to interests and needs is a priority. Surveys will be used. -The school has partnered with Children’s Aid Society to broaden the scope of supports and opportunities provided to parents to assist them with the various crises and roadblocks that prohibit them and their children from getting the most out of the educational experience. Further opportunities to make the school a central hub for learning and support for the community are anticipated through an expanded partnership with Children’s Aid Society. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47  -The school consistently celebrates the accomplishments of students (perfect attendance, talent shows, science fairs, art fairs, poetry slams, etc.). These celebrations must become a conduit of bring parents into the building on a regular basis. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? Dunbar Middle School will strive to maintain a welcoming environment for all stakeholders. School Safety Agents will continue to greet visitors politely and positively and direct them to the right personnel as they have done for years at the school. The school leaders and support team will employ an open door policy, accommodating parents to come into the school regularly to discuss their children’s’ progress. -Part of the Family Engagement Time will be dedicated to holding mini parent-teacher conferences. When concerns regarding a student’s academic or social emotional progress arise, parental outreach will be made to bring parents into the intervention/support process. There is a parent coordinator’s office along with a Family Welcome Center with computers and literature to help families. -Dunbar Middle School will continue to send out a monthly newsletter to keep parents informed about the goings-on of the school. In addition, Dunbar seeks to create other outreach opportunities including phone banking, Skedula (an online grade reporting system), a school website, phone and email blast system, and social media venues. -Dunbar Middle School will partner with Children’s Aid Society to create multiple supports for parents. The school seeks to alleviate the myriad of obstacles that parent in the community face relative to mental health, housing, etc. The school seeks to create venues to inform parents of the curriculum their children are in engaged in, as well as provide parents with strategies they can use to promote their children’s’ learning outside of the school building. Dunbar Middle School also seeks to provide programs and opportunities for parents to better themselves including GED classes, workshops on healthy living, among other things. -Parent interests will be surveyed quarterly to see how Dunbar can better support them. -Parents will receive four report cards for the school year, a progress report quarterly, as well as information regarding promotion. Dunbar Middle School will hold 4 parent-teacher conferences during the school year. A Parent Teacher Conference Tool, created by the Community School Director, will be utilized to drive a positive and thorough conversation with teachers and parents. -Dunbar Middle School seeks to engage parents for positive activities, not just to address concerns. This will be done by celebrating students’ accomplishments (perfect attendance, student of the month, Honor Roll, etc.) EXPOs (talent show, performances) and other family oriented events (talent shows, performances, movie night, varsity sports, Lincoln Center Art exhibits, family trips through Urban Advantage, etc.). Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Dunbar Middle School stakeholders will be greeted by the school safety agents in a polite and courteous manner. They will proceed to the main office where the office staff will connect them with the appropriate personnel. If necessary, there are bilingual staff that can assist with translation. Dunbar Middle School and the Children's Aid Society will create a comfortable family space filled with important information, resources and a work area. We will have a dedicated area 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  in the library for technology that families can use for research, progress monitoring through Skedula and job/skill development. The entire school community is receiving training in RULER, and emotional intelligence paradigm from Yale University, that helps people understand how others are feeling as well as manage their own feelings How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? The principal seeks to create a Student Council, comprised of students who are getting the most out of what Dunbar Middle School has to offer. The Student Council will be viewed as student leaders, promoting the vision of Dunbar Middle School for the student perspective. The parents of these successful students will be targeted to create a strong Parents’ Association and SLT. The PA and the SLT will be encouraged to become active parts of the school community, organizing events, activities, and fundraising. Also, the principal seeks to create a series of instructional walks for parents so that they can view classroom practice and gain a better understanding of the instruction taking place in the school. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Dunbar Middle School will engage parents in many different ways. The community and families will be invited to various events aimed at celebrating the student's social and emotional development, academic achievement and showcasing student talent. Through our partnership with Lincoln Center, Children's Aid and New York edge, we'll plan family workshops to empower parents through content and skill development. The four Parent Teacher Conferences will help parents gain a better understanding of the school's goals, curriculum and factors that impact their child's progress. Skedula will create a platform where parents can readily monitor their child's performance and provide another venue for communication between parents and teachers. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Student Council, CET, and SLT Workshops and events through CBOs Give students, staff, CBO partners and parents a more active role and voice in the school Skills development, recognition and empowerment opportunities Parent Teacher Conference Tool/ Student Led conferences Create a thorough picture of the student to help drive a positive and productive dialogue How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Attending Parent Teacher Conferences, regularly logging intoDataCation, participatingin weeklyteacherparent engagement times Family partnerships with CBO: Assist with and attend family workshops, EXPOs, student celebrationevents, trips 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49  Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes. The Children's Aid Society has an office which also serves as a communityspace for parents and other CBOs. Parent Coordinator has a family space for parents. Will be creating a dedicated family space and technologycenter. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? Dunbar Middle School will use a Parent Survey to assess what Adult Education classes parents are interested in and using that information, will collaborate with the CBOs to either create or connect families with the most appropriate adult education class. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Parents will have access to Skedula where they can view their child's performance and progress. Dunbar Middle School will distribute quarterly Progress Reports so parents are constantly informed on how their child is doing during the semester. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, 80% of families will have attended at least one parent teacher conference and be able to identify through a survey one piece of advice that they can implement at home to help their child's academic performance, as a result of collaboration between CBO partners and school staff to use multiple forms of outreach. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance Performance Index on State Math Exam Performance Index on State ELA Exam 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Student Attendance The start time is June 2018 and the student council will continue throughout the entire 2018-19. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, parent coordinator, community school director, social worker, teacher designated as student council members How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) -consistent attendance in Student advisory council meetings -increase in student collaboration in programming and events Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Creation of Student council to provide the student voice needed at Dunbar Middle School. The school leadership will assist in the selection student council in the beginning of the 2017-18 school year. Development of strong SLT and PA to further increase participation and further engagement of parents as stakeholders Current 6th and 7th grade students identified in the school by teachers and staff (and approved by the principal). These students should be a variety of high performers and/or students who are getting the most out of what Dunbar has to offer. Dunbar seeks to target the parents of the student advisory board. The rational is that those parents have children that are getting the most out of what 301 Student Attendance Principal, parent coordinator, community school director, Children’s Aid Society, District 8 Parent coordinator -increase in SLT members, specially from parents of the Students Advisory Council -consistent attendance at SLT meetings The creation of the SLT and PA would begin June 2018, and the SLT and PA would meet throughout the 2018-19 school year, as per mandates. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51  Implementation of more celebratory events including Talent shows, Art expos, Poetry slams, Varsity sports, Lincoln Center performances, assemblies for perfect attendance and student of the month, among other things designed to create opportunities for parent involvement in a positive way Implementation of a variety of communication methods between the school and the community including newsletter, school website, online grading system, social media to create better give and take between the school and all stakeholders. Implement a series of parent workshops working on independent reading strategies to implement at home has to offer, and could be advocates of the school in the community. All students and families Student Attendance September 2018- June 2019 School staff and CBO partners All parents Performance Index on State ELA Exam September 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, school support staff, CBO partner Performance Index on State Math Exam 6th grade parents performance index on ELA exam quarterly aligned with report card distribution (Nov, Feb, April, June) Principal, Assistant Principal, 6th grade ELA teachers, parent coordinator, community school director -increase in SLT and PA events and activities -higher percentage of invited families attending events and workshops -implement parent recommended classes -frequent use of the family space and technology center -parents regularly log into Skedula -increased reading stamina and volume as evidenced by reading logs -student reading levels improving as measured by IRLA Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 52  -Skedula will be purchased -Robo call system (School Messanger) will be purchased Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 55% of families will have attended at least one parent teacher conference and be able to identify through a survey one piece of advice that they can implement at home to help their child's academic performance, as a result of collaboration between CBO partners and school staff to use multiple forms of outreach. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Community School Director will input data into New Visions Student Sorter to track parent attendance, results from Spring Forum Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Dunbar MS, in conjunction with CBO partners, will use ELT to offer academic remediation and enrichment to decrease level 1s by 10% as evidenced by NYS ELA and Math exams. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. All students were informed that our school day is 1 hour longer and all students will be in attendance. Parents were notified. In the 2017-18 school year, Dunbar had 100 percent participation from all students in the ELT time. Arrangements will be made for any students who are mandated to ride the school bus. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 54   Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Dunbar Middle School will embed ELT time into the school day, three days a week (Tuesday-Thursday). The purpose of embedding ELT during the day is to create more class periods for students. Students will work on the core curriculum as well as receive AIS/RtI during extra periods. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The key personnel responsible for the implementation and overseeing of ELT are the APs, Community School Director, CBO partners/supervisors, parent coordinator, teachers who opt into ELT, school support staff, and the principal who will ensure that ELT is aligned to the school’s vision and is progressing towards desired goals. The instructional leadership team will meet on a regularly scheduled basis to look at student achievement data and to make decisions regarding implementation or revision. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The ELT program begins in September 2018 and will continue until June 2019 on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. the extra time is embedded in the regular day program in the form of 2 extra instructional periods a day. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Per session/ pro rata set aside for ELT ELT time is embedded into the school day CBO partners , namely Children's Aid Society and New York Edge Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 2018-19 RSCEP-PF C4E 55  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019, MS 301 in conjunction with CBO partners will use ELT to offer academic remediation, enrichment, and test sophistication, coupled with learning opportunities focused on the arts, healthy living and character development to decrease level 1s by 6% as evidenced scores on ELA and Math school wide interim assessments. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ready test ELA and Math (paper version) Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By the end of June 2019, Dunbar teachers and staff will collaborate with community based organization partners to use multiple forms of outreach, ensuring that 85 percent of parents have come into the building for at least 1 conversation regarding their child’s progress and 1 parent event for family engagement. As evidenced, sign in sheets and attendance sheets will be used to gather the data. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance Performance index on state math exam Performance index on state ELA exam Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Children's Aid Society all students and their families Lincoln Center all students and their families NY Historical Society all students and their parents mental health services, counseling services, housing assistance, reading remediation, success mentoring embedding arts into multiple subject areas as a way of increasing student engagement and performance developing exhibits for the District 8 Museum at Dunbar linked to the SS curriculum; conduct field trips for students and families to the NY Historical Society New York Edge afterschool students and their parents bringing robotics, coding, arts and sports in the form of an afterschool program Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57  2. 3. 4. implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The community school director is someone who understands the particular needs of the Dunbar MS community. The CSD ensures that all CBO partners are operating in alignment with the vision espoused by the principal for the school community. Students will be provided with small group remediation or enrichment that is built into the schedule and based on academic data. The will also receive ELT embedded into the academic day, where they will receive academic remediation and enrichment through small group instruction and the use of the iReady diagnostic program. This will be teacher led to ensure instructional capacity, but will include supports from CBO partners. Students will be provided mental health services through counseling services provided by school staff in house, and by outside services provided by Children’s Aid Society as needed. Dunbar seeks to engage parents as partners in students’ achievement by keeping parents informed and creating a variety of outreach initiatives (phone blasts, school website, social media, emails, and letters). Parent will be encouraged to take part in parent teacher conferences, parent workshops, and celebrations of student work and talents. Regularly scheduled meetings will take place involving the principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, teacher leaders, and key CBO staff to assess the impact of the community school initiatives on student achievement and parental/community involvement. This will be data driven and MS 301 seeks to use the data provided from assessments, the data sorter, the heat map and ATS. Much of this data will be cataloged through Skedula to provide access to multiple stakeholders. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58  The key personnel responsible for the implementation and overseeing of community school initiative are the Community School Director, assistant principals, CBO partners/supervisors, parent coordinator, teachers, school support staff, and the principal who will ensure that ELT is aligned to the school’s vision and is progressing towards desired goals. The principal, community school director, assistant principals, parent coordinator and CBO representatives will meet on a regularly scheduled basis to look at student achievement data and to make decisions regarding implementation or revision. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Implementation of Skedula as a means of organizing student grades and communicating with parents online School will use social media to engage and inform parents Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. All community school implementations will begin in September 2018 and will end June 2019. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During core lessons -During built in intervention periods -During ELT Differentiation and scaffolding during lessons -Small group instruction -Tutoring I-ready IRLA I-ready EngageNY Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) -Students scoring high level 1 on the 2018NYS ELA Exam will be identified as pushable -Students identified by teachers as low performing based on 2018NYS ELA exam as well as in class assessments will be identified -Students who are reading below grade level as identified by IRLAassessement Students scoring high level 1 on 2018 NYS Math Exam will be identified as pushable -Students identified as low performing based on 2018NYS Math Exam as well as in class assessments will be identified -Students who perform poorly on initial iReadydiagnostic assessment Differentiation and scaffolding during lessons During core lessons -During built in intervention periods -Small group instruction -Tutoring -During ELT 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60  Science Social Studies administered in Sept. 2018 Students identified by teachers as low performing based on 2018 Science NYCPT (MOSL) as well as in class assessments Students identified by teachers as low performing based on 2018 SS NYCPT (MOSL) as well as in class assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students identified by teachers based on observed behaviors or conversations with student(s) -Students identified by parents as needing at risk service because of issues at home that may potentially impact the student repeated reading of content covered in class Differentiation and scaffolding during lessons -Small group instruction -Tutoring -supplementary reading to help improve prior knowledge regarding content area repeated reading of content covered in class During core lessons -During built in intervention periods -During ELT Differentiation and scaffolding during lessons During core lessons -During built in intervention periods -supplementary reading to help improve prior knowledge regarding content area City Connects by Children’s Aid Society -Small group instruction -Tutoring One on one -During ELT During the school day -If provided by outside counselor then the schedule and duration will be determined by him/her 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 25 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. -Assistance with purchasing uniforms -Assistance with purchasing school supplies -Referrals for health/ mental health services through Children's Aid Society -Vision screening and glasses through Warby Parker Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 62  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 63  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. A hiring committee is employed consisting of administrators, and teachers. Candidates are interviewed, lesson plans reviewed and demo lessons evaluated before hiring. Teachers are observed and their strengths and needs are considered as they are assigned, as well as their license area. Dunbar MS is working closely with the district office, the Office of Renewal, and Central HR department to ensure the hiring of highly qualified candidates. Through frequent observation from administrators and inter-visitations with colleagues, teachers are monitored and supported when areas of concern are identified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). PD is conducted by administrators, consultants, district personnel, Instructional Leaderhship Team and teacher teams based on needs identified through observations as well as on instructional shifts and strategies related to CCSS. Also, teacher will be surveyed on needs that would like addressed through professional development opportunities. Lastly, our school has partnered with UFT Teacher Center to employ a full time instructional coach to support teacher development as well as provide mentorship. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64  n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams interview different assessment providers to determine which assessments best align to CCSS stat tests and which assessments provide data into which standards are mastered and which are not. Teachers are exposed to PD regarding data driven instruction (primarily from Bambrick-Santoyo’s Data Driven Instruction). Teacher teams meet regularly to look at student work to determine trends and areas to focus on as they revise their plans. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 65 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 147,000 18,800 37,000 x x x 11,200 1,436,000 x x Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 67  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Dunbar , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Dunbar will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 68  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/ State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) MS 301 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 70  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 75  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The school currently serves 73 ENL students. The extended day supplemental program provides direct instruction to ENL students relative to all content area. Performance data indicates a need for extended time on task, and we seek incremental growth relative to specific skills in both ELA and Math that reflect comprehension, number sense, and numerical fluency and expression. All ENL students are invited to participate. The language of instruction is English, then supplemented with thesauruses so ENL students can process new vocabulary and academic language. The program takes place Tuesday and Thursday after school for two hours each day. The ENL teachers and a teacher assistant (paraprofessional) co-teach the program. We use a NYSESLAT test prep program, leveled for each student to conduct the instruction. We coordinate with our Math. Science and Social studies teachers to let the ENL teacher know what concept are currently being taught so that she can bring some of the vocabulary into the program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: We will continue to partner with Fordham University, which provides a Coach for our school once a week to work with our ENL teacher and the rest of our teaching staff. Schedule and duration: Every two months the Coach will deliver Professional Development to our entire staff during our Monday PD. Topics to be covered, schedule and time: Making the curriculum accessible for ENL: Incorporating language objectives in lesson planning for our ENL students. Vocabulary instruction for ENL: More Topics and PD opportunities will be scheduled as the school year goes on depending on the need of our staff and students. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 76  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: All parents of ENL students will stay informed of all activates, Parent meetings. We will also have specific meeting for our ENL parents on strategies to help their child develop their understanding of the English language and how to apply it in all their school courses. These specific meeting will be help quarterly. Topics will include, What strategies can I use at home to help my child learn english, How to prepare for the NYSESLAT. and other topic will be asked for parents to come up as what they would like to know. These will be provided by ENL teacher, administrators and our CBO - Children's Aid Society. Parent contact will be made via phone, Skedula, School messenger and personal outreach. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel n/a n/a n/a n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a Other TOTAL n/a n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name Paul L. Dunbar Middle School Borough Bronx School Number 301 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Hesham Farid Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Gladys Guimaraes Teacher/Subject Area Alice Nesbitt (ELA) Teacher/Subject Area Bernice Nichols (Math) Related-Service Provider Lorna Campbell Superintendent Dr. Karen Ames Assistant Principal Fredrick Kennedy Coach NA School Counselor Lorna Campbell Parent Maritza Rivera Parent Coordinator Veronica Roland Field Support Center Staff Member Mr. Jose Ruiz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 220 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 79 Total number of ELLs 46 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 20.91%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the IRLA at the beginning of the year to test student Reading Levels and an On-Demand writing piece to test writing skills. Every 6-8 weeks there are interim assessments for cumulative curriculum year to date and the IRLA is administered every 6 weeks to test reading level to show growth. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? There will be a parallel program for entering and emerging student running concurrent to ELA classes. This will be taught by one ENL teacher. A second ENL teacher will do push in instruction. Both ENL teachers will participate in common planning with content teachers to ensure a cohesive delivery of instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80  The NYSESLAT scores are reviewed and compared from year to year. Students participate in IRLA (independent reading assessments at least 3 times a year. Students will take the iReady diagnostic assessment 3 times a year. Students will Studens receive progress reports and are observed on how they complete assignments as well as test scores. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Common planning times are dedicated to looking at student work and assessment data to make instructional and intervention decisions 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 1/3 of our students are in Entering level and 1/3 are at the Expanding level the others are at the Emerging and Transitioning level and 2/3 of our students are less then three years in the country (Beginners) 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Common planning time, departmental memos, weekly memos from the administration Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The students are grouped by proficiency level. The entering and emerging students are pulled are Pull-Out program 4 periods a week and the ENL pushes in the other 4 periods a week. The other students are part of a Push-In Program 4 periods a week. Our school has a Block Program model where the students are grouped heterogeneously. The ESL teacher plans with the content area teachers involved. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ELL students have been placed in certain sections to ensure that they are receiving the mandated instructional time. All students get 360 minutes of ENL. Entering and emerging students get 180 minutes of Stand Alone ENL. T he ENL minutes are delivered by 2 certified ESL teacher and the ELA by a certified ELA teacher and ENL teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81  Content area support is provided in various ways. Ell Students are grouped according to levels as determined by the most recent LAB-R scores. Student Learning Inventories are given to gain an additional insight. This is taken into consideration to maximize learning. Approaches can maybe visual, auditory or kinesthetic learners. Push in assistance is offered to ELL students as they work independently . The ESL Teacher circulates and monitors student’s comprehension and progress. Restating content area directions and modeling responses aid in making cognitive information more comprehensible. The Pull Out format is also used. The ESL teacher in collaboration with the content area teacher takes the ELL students to a separate location and re-teaches the subject matter. The students can review key words or clarify concepts through role-playing, or using technology. The ELL students each ihave an pad to be use for understanding and communication. Key websites are used that make abstract concepts concrete and complete meaning through visual input. Cognitive games which are student centered make learning concrete, independent and memorable. Often vocabulary or verb type bingo games in which the ELL student is the caller helps to create confidence in pronunciation as the learning environment is a risk free and a fun one where mistakes or risk-taking is encouraged and applauded. Pocket Charts with sentence strips are used to make vocabulary words more student friendly. Different verbs with different verb endings can be modeled and remodel. The ELL student can call on others to arrange word strips with visuals in proper sentence sequence, or the correct meaning, or connect the country with the correct capital. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ENL teacher is verse in technology a makes sure she finds materials for all students in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? LLs with special needs are given test modifications. The staff is made aware of their skills and performance levels. The ESL teacher collaborates with the Special Education teacher to improve the skills of these students. The ELAND review has been adminstered to all ELL-SWD students. Like all SWD mandates, ESL support is given when noted on student's IEP. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with special needs participate in ENL with their general education ELL peers ,and accommodations and modifications are provided as per the students' IEPs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In the content areas, especially with the ELLs that are entering and emerging, teachers use textbooks in the native language. Dictionaries and glossaries are used for all ELL subgroups. When tradebooks are not available, teachers use internet resources. Some ELLs are also receiving Academic Intervention Services in English for reading and math. All beginner ELLs utilize tablets for translation purposes throughout the school day. Emerging readers receive 6-8 weeks of Great Leaps reading intervention. The ELL students also use 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Buy more picture books and lower level book so that Ell students have more choices for their independent reading time. Also supplementing grade level resources from Teachers College and Core Ready with lower grade materials from the same companies to help build up the students foundational skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? na 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. They participate in all core subject and arts courses. They also have access to afterschool extracurricular and intervention programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs receive native language support and the use of laptops. The ELLs will also be using Imagine Learning 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Textbook are purchased in student home language and exams are taken in English and home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The students are assessed when they enter the school to acquire their instructional levels. Students are also interviewed via an interest survey to inform teacher decisions 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? na 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). ENL students participate in the new student orientation prior to the school year starting. Translation services are provided at that time. A newly enrolled student receive a personalized orientation with parent coordinator, guidance counselor, ENL teacher, where they get to tour the building and get caught up on things they need to be aware of. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? na 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? na 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Teachers are encouraged to attend conferences on ELLs. Content area teachers also meet with the ESL teacher to discuss strategies. All teachers of ELLs attend Core Curriculum PD once a month. 2. The ENL teacher support in identifying PD opportunities for all staff. 3. The ENL teacher attends monthly PD provided by the BFSC 4. The ENL teacher receives on site coaching from a coach provided by Fordham University. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 3. The ENL teacher supports staff in making the transition from elementary to middle school. The guidance counselor provides ELLs and their families with guidance in high school options, requirements, and selection. We have hired a Spanish speaking intern that helps parents with the selection process 4. 10 hours of training is scheduled through the year for all staff on ELL training. The agendas and sign in sheets are kept with all other PDs information in the Principal's Office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited to an orientation in August before the beginning of school. The orientation for newly admitted ELLs is in October. The ESL teacher reaches out to parents during the year. The SLT meets monthly which includes parents. Twice a year there are parent teacher conferences to discuss the goals for the students.se to question here: 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents generally participate in events, award ceremonies, and parent workshops. The outreach to the includes sending letters and making calls in their native languages Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. na 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Hesham Farid, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Paul L. Dunbar Middle Scho School DBN: 08X301 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Hesham Farid Title Principal Fredrick Kennedy Assistant Principal Veronica Roland Parent Coordinator Gladys Guimaraes ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maritza Rivera Parent Alice Nesbitt Teacher/Subject Area Bernice Nichols Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Lorna Cambell School Counselor Karen Ames Jose Ruiz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 86  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X301 School Name: The Paul L. Dunbar Middle School Superintendent: Dr. Karen Ames The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The information is pulled from HLIS, the students emergency contact cards as well as parent surveys sent home by the Parent Coordiantor. Any parents of new registrations meet with the Guidance Counselor and the ESL teacher to determine language needs. Also the historical demographic information of the community is considered. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish, French, Urdu,Wolof 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. WolofParent handbook, high schools application process information, school newsletter, notices of non attendance days, announcements of parent teacher conferences and parent workshops, report cards & progress reports, attendance information, after school program information 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent teacher conferences, curriculum nights, award ceremonies, graduation ceremony, in school performances, parent workshops, disciplinary conferenceces, high school application informational session and coaching, attendance monitoring 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 88  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Parent Bill of Rights and the Parent Handbook will be reviewed with parents during orientations and curriculum night with families. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The need for translation and interpretation will be monitored by the APs, PC, Community School Director and the Guidance Counselor to ensure several sets of eyes are checking for the requiste versions . The principal will oversee all outgoing documents. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89 
